194L.  [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2016, w .e.f. 1-6-2016. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
667 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Payment of compensation on acquisition of certain immovable propert y.

194LA.  Any person responsible for paying to a resident any sum, being in the nature of compensation or the
enhanced compensation or the consi-deration or the enhanced consideration on account of compulsory
acquisition, under any law for the time being in force, of any immovable property (other than agricultural
land), shall, at the time of payment of such sum in ca sh or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other
mode, whichever is earlier, deduct an amount equal to ten per cent of such sum as income-tax thereon:
Provided  that no deduction shall be made under this sect ion where the amount of such payment or, as the
case may be, the aggregate amount of such payments to a resident during the financial year does not exceed
93[five lakh ] rupees:
Provided further  that no deduction shall be made under this section where such payment is made in respect
of any award or agreement which has been exempted fr om levy of income-tax under section 96 of the Right
to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (30
of 2013).
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "agricultural land" means agricultural land in India including land situate in any area referred to in
items ( a) and ( b) of sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( 14) of section 2;
(ii) "immovable property" means any land (other than ag ricultural land) or any building or part of a
building.

93. Sub. for "two lakh and fifty thousand" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Earlier "two lakh and
fifty thousand" was Sub. for "two hundred thousand" by Act No. 28 of 2016, w.e.f. 1-6-2016 and
"two hundred" was Sub. for "one hundred" by Act No. 23 of 2012, w.e.f. 1-7-2012.
Income by way of interest from infrastructure debt fund.

194LB.  Where any income by way of interest is payabl e to a non-resident, not being a company, or to a
foreign company, by an infrastructure  debt  fund referred to in clause ( 47)  of  section  10,  the  person
responsible for making the payment shall, at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or
at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of  a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is
earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of five per cent.
Certain income from units of a business trust.

194LBA.  (1) Where any distributed income referred to in s ection 115UA, being of the nature referred to in
clause ( 23FC ) or clause ( 23FCA ) of section 10, is payable by a business trust to its unit holder being a
resident, the person responsible for making the payment shall at the time of credit of such payment to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in  cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by anyINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
668 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent.
(2) Where any distributed income referred to in section 115UA, being of the nature referred to in clause
(23FC ) of section 10, is payable by a business trust to its unit holder, being a non-resident (not being a
company) or a foreign company, the person responsible for making the payment shall at the time of credit of
such payment to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by the issue of acheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlie r, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of five per
cent in case of income of the nature referred to in sub-clause ( a) and ten per cent in case of income of the
nature referred to in sub-clause ( b), of the said clause.
(2A) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in respect of income of the nature referred to
in sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 23FC ) of section 10, if the special purpose vehicle referred to in the said clause
has not exercised the option under section 115BAA.
(3) Where any distributed income referred to in section 115UA, being of the nature referred to in clause
(23FCA ) of section 10, is payable by a business trust to its unit holder, being a non-resident (not being a
company), or a foreign company, the person responsible for making the payment shall at the time of credit of
such payment to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by the issue of a
cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force.
Income in respect of units of investment fund.

194LBB.  Where any income, other than that proportion of income which is of the same nature as income
referred to in clause ( 23FBB ) of section 10, is payable to a unit holder in respect of units of an investment
fund specified in clause ( a) of the Explanation 1 to section 115UB, the person responsible for making the
payment shall, at the time of credit of such income to  the account of payee or at the time of payment thereof
in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax
thereon,—
(i) at the rate of ten per cent, where the payee is a resident;
(ii) at the rates in force, where the payee is a non-resi dent (not being a company) or a foreign company
:
Provided that where the payee is a non-resident (not bein g a company) or a foreign company, no deduction
shall be made in respect of any income that is not chargeable to tax under the provisions of the Act.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "unit" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of the Explanation 1 to section 115UB;
(b) where any income as aforesaid is credited to any account, whether called "suspense account" or by
any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such creditingshall be deemed to be the credit of such income to the account of the payee, and the provisions of
this section shall apply accordingly.
Income in respect of investment in securitization trust.

194LBC.  (1) Where any income is payable to an investor, being a resident, in respect of an investment in a
securitisation trust specified in clause ( d) of the Explanation occurring after section 115TCA, the person
responsible for making the payment shall, at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
669 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of  a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is
earlier, deduct income-tax thereon, 94[at the rate of ten per cent ].
(2) Where any income is payable to an investor, bein g a non-resident (not being a company) or a foreign
company, in respect of an investment in a securitisation trust specified in clause ( d) of the Explanation
occurring after section 115TCA, the person responsible for making the payment shall, at the time of credit of
such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque ordraft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon, at the rates in force.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "investor" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( a) of the Explanation occurring after
section 115TCA;
(b) where any income as aforesaid is credited to any account, whether called "suspense account" or by
any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such creditingshall be deemed to be the credit of such income to the account of the payee, and the provisions of
this section shall apply accordingly.

94. Sub. for the following by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
"at the rate of—
(i) twenty-five per cent, if the payee is an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily;
(ii) thirty per cent, if the payee is any other person"
Income by way of interest from Indian company.

194LC.  (1) Where any income by way of interest referred to in sub-section (2) is payable to a non-resident,
not being a company or to a foreign company by a specified company or a business trust, the person
responsible for making the payment, shall at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or
at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of  a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is
earlier, deduct the income-tax thereon at the rate of five per cent:
Provided  that in case of income by way of interest referred to clause ( ib) of sub-section (2), the income-tax
shall be deducted at the rate of four per cent:
95[Provided further  that in case of income by way of interest referred to in clause ( ic) of sub-section (2),
the income-tax shall be deducted at the rate of nineper cent.]
(2) The interest referred to in sub-section (1) shall be  the income by way of interest payable by the specified
company or the business trust,—
(i) in respect of monies borrowed by it in foreign currency from a source outside India,—
(a) under a loan agreement at any time on or after the 1st day of July, 2012 but before the 1st
day of July, 2023; or
(b) by way of issue of long-term infrastructure bonds at any time on or after the 1st day of
July, 2012 but before the 1st day of October, 2014; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
670 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c) by way of issue of any long-term bond including long-term infrastructure bond at any time
on or after the 1st day of October, 2014 but before the 1st day of July, 2023,
as approved by the Central Government in this behalf; or
(ia) in  respect  of  monies borrowed  by  it  from a  s ource  outside  India  by  way  of  issue  of  rupee
denominated bond before the 1st day of July, 2023; or
(ib) in respect of monies borrowed by it from a source outside India by way of issue of any long-term
bond or rupee denominated bond on or after the 1st day of April, 2020 but before the 1st day of
July, 2023, which is listed only on a  recognised stock exchange  located in any International
Financial Services Centre, 96[or]
95[(ic)in respect  of money borrowed by it  from a  source  outside  India  by way of issuance  of any
long-term bond or rupee denominated bond on or after the 1st day of July, 2023, which is listed
only on a recognised stock exchange located in an International Financial Services Centre; and]
(ii) to the extent to which such interest does not exceed the amount of interest calculated at the rate
approved by the Central Government in this behalf, having regard to the terms of the loan or the
bond and its repayment.
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section—
(a) "foreign currency" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);
(b) "specified company" means an Indian company;
(c) "International Financial Services Centre" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( q) of
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);
(d) "recognised stock exchange" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( ii) of Explanation 1  to
clause ( 5) of section 43.

95. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-7-2023.

96. Sub. for "and" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-7-2023.
Income by way of interest on certain bonds and Government securities.

194LD.  (1) Any person who is responsible for paying to a person being a Foreign Institutional Investor or a
Qualified Foreign Investor, any income by way of interest referred to in sub-section (2), shall, at the time of
credit of such income to the account of the payee or at  the time of payment of such income in cash or by the
issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whic hever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate
of five per cent.
(2) The income by way of interest referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the interest payable,—
(a) on or after the 1st day of June, 2013 but before the 1st day of July, 2023 in respect of the
investment made by the payee in—
(i) a rupee denominated bond of an Indian company; or
(ii) a Government security;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
671 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) on or after the 1st day of April, 2020 but before the 1st day of July, 2023 in respect of the
investment made by the payee in municipal debt securities:
Provided  that the rate of interest in respect of bond referred to in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) shall not
exceed the rate as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section,—
(a) "Foreign  Institutional  Investor"  shall  have  the  meaning  assigned  to  it  in  clause  ( a)  of  the
Explanation to section 115AD;
(b) "Government security" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( b) of secti on 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);
(ba) "municipal debt securities" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( m) of sub-regulation (1)
of regulation 2 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue and Listing of Municipal Debt
Securities) Regulations, 2015 made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
(15 of 1992);
(c) "Qualified Foreign Investor" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Circular No. Cir/IMD
/DF/14/2011, dated the 9th August, 2011, as amended from time to time, issued by the Securities
and Exchange Board of India, under section 11 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,1992 (15 of 1992).
Payment of certain sums by certain individuals or Hindu undivided family.

194M.  (1) Any person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily (other than those who are required
to deduct income-tax as per the provisions of section 194C, section 194H or section 194J) responsible forpaying any sum to any resident for carrying out any work (including supply of labour for carrying out any
work) in pursuance of a contract, by way of commi ssion (not being insurance commission referred to in
section 194D) or brokerage or by way of fees for professional services during the financial year, shall, at thetime of credit of such sum or at the time of payment of such sum in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or
by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct an amount equal to 
97-98[two] per cent of such sum as
income-tax thereon:
Provided  that no such deduction under this section shall be made if such sum or, as the case may be,
aggregate of such sums, credited or paid to a resi dent during a financial year does not exceed fifty lakh
rupees.
(2) The provisions of section 203A shall not apply to a person required to deduct tax in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "contract" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( iii) of the Explanation  to section 194C;
(b) "commission or brokerage" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( i) of the Explanation  to
section 194H;
(c) "professional services" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( a) of the Explanation  to
section 194J;
(d) "work" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( iv) of the Explanation  to section 194C.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
672 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
97-98.  Sub. for "five" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Payment of certain amounts in cash.

194N. Every person, being,—
(i) a banking company to which the Banking Regulati on Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) applies (including any
bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);
(ii) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking; or
(iii) a post office,
who is responsible for paying any sum, being the amount or the aggregate of amounts, as the case may be, in
cash exceeding one crore rupees during the previous year , to any person (herein referred to as the recipient)
from one or more accounts maintained by the recipient with it shall, at the time of payment of such sum,
deduct an amount equal to two per cent of such sum, as income-tax:
Provided  that in case of a recipient who has not filed the returns of income for all of the three assessment
years relevant to the three previous years, for which the time limit of file return of income under sub-section
(1) of section 139 has expired, immediately preceding th e previous year in which the payment of the sum is
made to him, the provision of this section shall apply with the modification that—
(i) the sum shall be the amount or the aggregate of amounts, as the case may be, in cash exceeding
twenty lakh rupees during the previous year; and
(ii) the deduction shall be—
(a) an amount equal to two per cent of the sum where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as
the case may be, being paid in cash exceeds twenty lakh rupees during the previous year
but does not exceed one crore rupees; or
(b) an amount equal to five per cent of the sum where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as
the case may be, being paid in cash exceeds one crore rupees during the previous year:
Provided further  that the Central Government may specify in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India,
by notification in the Official Gazette, the recipient in whose case the first proviso shall not apply or apply at
reduced rate, if such recipient satisfies the conditions specified in such notification:
99[Provided also  that where the recipient is a co-operative society, the provisions of this section shall have
effect, as if for the words "one crore rupees", the words "three crore rupees" had been substituted:]
Provided also  that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any payment made to—
(i) the Government;
(ii) any banking company or co-operative society enga ged in carrying on the business of banking or a
post office;
(iii) any business correspondent of a banking company or co-operative society engaged in carrying on
the business of banking, in accordance with the guidelines issued in this regard by the Reserve
Bank of India under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
(iv) any white label automated teller machine operator of a banking company or co-operative society
engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance with the authorisation issued by the
Reserve Bank of India under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007):
Provided also  that the Central Government may specify in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, by
notification in the Official Gazette, the recipient in w hose case the provision of this section shall not apply or
apply at reduced rate, if such recipient satisfies the conditions specified in such notification.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
673 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

99. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Payment of certain sums by e-commerce operator to e-commerce participant.
194-O.  (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any of the provisions of Part B of this
Chapter, where sale of goods or provision of services of an e-commerce participant is fac ilitated by an
e-commerce operator through its digital or electronic facility or platform (by whatever name called), such
e-commerce operator shall, at the time of credit of am ount of sale or services or both to the account of an
e-commerce participant or at the time of payment thereof to such e-commerce participant by any mode,
whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax at the rate of 1[0.1] per cent of the gross amount of such sales or
services or both.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, any payment made by a purchaser of goods or recipient
of services directly to an e-commerce participant for the sale of goods or provision of services or both,facilitated  by  an  e-commerce  operator,  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  am ount  credited  or  paid  by  the
e-commerce operator to the e-commerce participant and shall be included in the gross amount of such sale
or services for the purpose of deduction of income-tax under this sub-section.
(2) No deduction under sub-section (1) shall be made fro m any sum credited or paid or likely to be credited
or paid during the previous year to the account of an e-commerce participant, being an individual or Hindu
undivided fa mily, where the gross am ount of such sale or services or both during the previous year does not
exceed five lakh rupees and such e-commerce participant has furnished his Permanent Account Number orAadhaar number to the e-commerce operator.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part B of this Chapter, a transaction in respect of which tax has
been deducted by the e-commerce operator under sub-sect ion (1), or which is not liable to deduction under
sub-section (2), shall not be liable to tax deduction at source under any other provision of this Chapter:
Provided  that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to any amount or aggregate of amounts
received  or  receivable  by  an  e-commerce  operator  for  hosting advertisements or  providing any  other
services which are not in connection with the sale or services referred to in sub-section (1).
(4) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pr ovisions of this section, the Board may, with the approval
of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(5) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament,
and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the e-commerce operator.
(6) For the purposes of this section, e-commerce operator shall be deemed to be the person responsible for
paying to e-commerce participant.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "electronic commerce" means the supply of goods or services or both, including digital products,
over digital or electronic network;
(b) "e-commerce  operator"  means a  person who owns, operates or  manages digital or electronic
facility or platform for electronic commerce;
(c) "e-commerce participant" means a person resident in India selling g oods or providing services or
both, including digital products, through digital or electronic fac ility  or  platform for  electronic
commerce;
(d) "services" includes "fees for technical services" and fees for "professional services", as defined in
the Explanation  to section 194J.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
674 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

1. Sub. for "one" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Deduction of tax in case of specified senior citizen.

194P.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, in case of a specified
senior citizen, the specified bank shall, after giving effect to the deduction allowable under Chapter VI-A
and rebate allowable under section 87A, compute the total income of such specified senior citizen for the
relevant assessment year and deduct income-tax on such total income on the basis of the rates in force.
(2) The provisions of section 139 shall not apply to a specified senior citizen for the assessment year relevant
to the previous year in which the tax has been deducted under sub-section (1).
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "specified bank" means a banking company as the Central Government may, by notification in
Official Gazette, specify;
(b) "specified senior citizen" means an individual, being a resident in India—
(i) who is of the age of seventy-five years or more at any time during the previous year;
(ii) who is having income of the nature of pension and no other income except the income of
the  nature  of  interest  received  or  receivable  from any  account  maintained  by  such
individual in the same specified bank in which he is receiving his pension income; and
(iii) has furnished a declaration to the specified ba nk containing such particulars, in such form
and verified in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Deduction of tax at source on payment of certain sum for purchase of goods.

194Q.  (1) Any person, being a buyer who is responsible for paying any sum to any resident (hereafter in this
section referred to as the seller) for purchase of any goods of the value or aggregate of such value exceeding
fifty lakh rupees in any previous year, shall, at the time of credit of such sum to the account of the seller or
at the time of payment thereof by any mode, whichever is earlier, deduct an amount equal to 0.1 per cent ofsuch sum exceeding fifty lakh rupees as income-tax.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, "buyer" means a person whose total sales, gross receipts
or  turnover  from the  business  carried  on  by  him exceed  ten  crore  rupees  during the  financial year
immediately preceding the financial year in which the purchase of g oods is carried out, not being a person,
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for this purpose, subject to
such conditions as may be specified therein.
(2) Where any sum referred to in sub-section (1) is  credited to any account, whether called "suspense
account" or by any other name, in the books of account of  the person liable to pay such income, such credit
of income shall be deemed to be the credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of
this section shall apply accordingly.
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the Board may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(4) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (3) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be
laid before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and the personINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
675 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
liable to deduct tax.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a transaction on which—
(a) tax is deductible under any of the provisions of this Act; and
(b)tax is collectible under the provisions of section 206C 2[***].

2. Words "other than a transaction to which sub-sectio n (1H) of section 206C applies" omtt. by Act No. 7
of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Deduction of tax on benefit or perquisite in respect of business or profession.

194R.  (1) Any person responsible for providing to a resi dent, any benefit or perquisite, whether convertible
into money or not, arising from business or the exercise of a profession, by such resident, shall, beforeproviding such benefit or perquisite, as the case may be , to such resident, ensure that tax has been deducted
in respect of such benefit or perquisite at the rate of  ten per cent of the value or aggregate of value of such
benefit or perquisite:
Provided  that in a case where the benefit or perquisite, as the case may be, is wholly in kind or partly in
cash and partly in kind but such part in cash is not  sufficient to meet the liability of deduction of tax in
respect of whole of such benefit or perquisite, the person responsible for providing such benefit or perquisite
shall, before releasing the benefit or perquisite, ensu re that tax required to be deducted has been paid in
respect of the benefit or perquisite:
Provided further  that the provisions of this section shall not apply in case of a resident where the value or
aggregate of value of the benefit or perquisite provided or likely to be provided to such resident during the
financial year does not exceed twenty thousand rupees:
Provided also  that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a person being an individual or a Hindu
undivided fa mily, whose total sales, gross receipts or tur nover does not exceed one crore rupees in case of
business or fifty lakh rupees in case  of profession, during the  financial year immediately preceding the
financial year in which such benefit or perquisite, as the case may be, is provided by such person.
(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the Board may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(3) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be
laid before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the person
providing any such benefit or perquisite.
Explanation 
3[1].—For the purposes of this section, the expression "person responsible for providing" means
the person providing such benefit or perquisite, or in  case of a company, the company itself including the
principal officer thereof.
3[Explanation 2. — For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply
to any benefit or perquisite, whether in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind.]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
676 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

3. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Payment on transfer of virtual digital asset.

194S.  (1) Any person responsible for paying to any resident any sum by way of consideration for transfer of
a virtual digital asset, shall, at the time of credit of such sum to the account of the resident or at the time of
payment of such sum by any mode, whichever is ear lier, deduct an amount equal to one per cent of such
sum as income-tax thereon:
Provided  that in a case where the consideration for transfer of virtual digital asset is—
(a) wholly in kind or in exchange of another virtual digital asset, where there is no part in cash; or
(b) partly  in cash  and  partly  in  kind  but  the  part  in  cash  is not  sufficient  to  meet  the  liability  of
deduction of tax in respect of whole of such transfer,
the person responsible for paying such consideration shall, before releasing the consideration, ensure that tax
required to be deducted has been paid in respect of such consideration for the transfer of virtual digital asset.
(2) The provisions of 4[section 203A ] shall not apply to a specified person.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no tax shall be deducted in a case, where—
(a) the  consideration is payable  by a  specified person and the  value  or aggregate  value  of such
consideration does not exceed fifty thousand rupees during the financial year; or
(b) the consideration is payable by any person other than a specified person and the value or aggregate
value of such consideration does not exceed ten thousand rupees during the financial year.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 194-O,  in case of a transaction to which the provisions of
the said section are also applicable along with the provisions of this section, then, tax shall be deducted
under sub-section (1).
(5) Where any sum referred to in sub-section (1) is  credited to any account, whether called "Suspense
Account" or by any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such sum, such credit of
the sum shall be deemed to be the credit of such su m to the account of the payee and the provisions of this
section shall apply accordingly.
(6) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the Board may, with the prior
approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the purposes of removing the difficulty.
(7) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (6) shall be laid before each House of Parliament,
and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the person responsible for paying the consideration
on transfer of such virtual digital asset.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section "specified person" means a person,—
(a) being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, whose total sales, gross receipts or tur nover from
the business carried on by him or profession ex ercised by him does not exceed one crore rupees in
case of business or fifty lakh rupees in case of profession, during the financial year immediately
preceding the financial year in which such virtual digital asset is transferred;
(b) being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, not having any income under the head "Profits
and gains of business or profession" .INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
677 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

4. Sub. for "sections 203A and 206AB" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
5[Payments to partners of firms.
194T . (1) Any person, being a firm, responsible for paying any sum in the nature of salary, remuneration,
commission, bonus or interest to a partner of  the firm, shall, at the time of  credit of  such sum to the
account of  the partner (including the capital account) or at the time of  payment thereof, whichever is
earlier shall, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent.
(2) No deduction shall be made under sub-section (1) where such sum or the aggregate of  such sums
credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid to  the partner of the firm does not exceed twenty thousand
rupees during the financial year. ]

5. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.
Other sums.

195. (1) Any person responsible for paying to a non-resident, not being a company, or to a foreign company,
any interest (not being interest referred to in section 194LB or section 194LC) or section 194LD or any
other  sum chargeable  under  the  provisions of  this Act  (not  being income  chargeable  under  the  head
"Salaries") shall, at the time of credit of such income  to the account of the payee or at the time of payment
thereof in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct
income-tax thereon at the rates in force :
Provided  that in the case of interest payable by the Gove rnment or a public sector bank within the meaning
of clause ( 23D) of section 10 or a public financial institution within the meaning of that clause, deduction of
tax shall be made only at the time of payment thereof in  cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any
other mode.
Explanation 1 .—For the purposes of this section, where any inte rest or other sum as aforesaid is credited to
any account, whether called "Interest payable account" or "Suspense account" or by any other name, in thebooks of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such
income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.
Explanation  2. —For  the  removal of  doubts,  it  is hereby  clarified  that  the  obligation  to  comply  with
sub-section (1) and to make deduction thereunder applies and shall be deemed to have always applied andextends and shall be deemed to have always extended to all persons, resident or non-resident, whether or not
the non-resident person has—
(i) a residence or place of business or business connection in India; or
(ii) any other presence in any manner whatsoever in India.
(2) Where the person responsible for paying any such sum chargeable under this Act (other than salary) to aINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
678 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
non-resident considers that the whole of such sum would not be income chargeable in the case of the
recipient, he may make an application in such form  and manner to the Assessing Officer, to determine in
such manner, as may be prescribed, the appropriate proportion of such sum so chargeable, and upon such
determination, tax shall be deducted under sub-section (1) only on that proportion of the sum which is so
chargeable.
(3) Subject to rules made under sub-section (5), any person entitled to receive any interest or other sum on
which income-tax has to be deducted under sub-section (1) may make an application in the prescribed form
to the Assessing Officer for the grant of a certificate authorising him to receive such interest or other sumwithout deduction of tax under that sub-section, and where any such certificate is granted, every person
responsible for paying such interest or other sum to the person to whom such certificate is granted shall, so
long as the certificate is in force, make payment of such interest or other sum without deducting tax thereon
under sub-section (1).
(4) A certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall remain in force till the expiry of the period specified
therein or, if it is cancelled by the Assessing Officer before the expiry of such period, t ill such cancellation.
(5)  The  Board  may,  having regard  to  the  convenience  of  assessees and  the  interests of  revenue,  by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules specifying the cases in which, and the circumstances underwhich, an application may be made for the grant of a certificate under sub-section (3) and the conditions
subject to which such certificate may be granted and providing for all other matters connected therewith.
(6) The person responsible for paying to a non-resident, not being a company, or to a foreign company, any
sum, whether or not chargeable under the provisions of this Act, shall furnish the information relating topayment of such sum, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
(7)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-section  (1)  and  sub-section  (2),  the  Board  may,  by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify a class of persons or cases, where the person responsible for
paying to a non-resident, not being a company, or to a foreign company, any sum, whether or not chargeable
under the provisions of this Act, shall make an applicat ion in such form and manner to the Assessing Officer,
to determine in such manner, as may be prescribed, the appropriate proportion of sum chargeable, and upon
such determination, tax shall be deducted under sub-section (1) on that proportion of the sum which is sochargeable.
Income payable "net of tax" .

195A.  In a case other than that referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 192, where under an agreement or
other arrangement, the tax chargeable on any income referred to in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter
is to be borne by the person by whom the income is  payable, then, for the purposes of deduction of tax
under those provisions such income shall be increased to such amount as would, after deduction of tax
thereon at the rates in force for the financial year in which such income is payable, be equal to the net
amount payable under such agreement or arrangement.
Interest or dividend or other sums payable to Government, Reserve Bank or certain corporations.

196. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, no deduction of tax
shall be made by any person from any sums payable to—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
679 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(i) the Government, or
(ii) the Reserve Bank of India, or
(iii) a corporation established by or under a Central Act which is, under any law for the time being in
force, exempt from income-tax on its income, or
(iv) a Mutual Fund specified under clause ( 23D) of section 10,
where such sum is payable to it by way of interest or dividend in respect of any securities or shares owned
by it or in which it has full beneficial interest, or any other income accruing or arising to it.
Income in respect of units of non-residents.

196A.  (1) Any person responsible for paying to a  non-resident, not being a  company, or to a foreign
company, any income in respect of units of a Mutual Fund specified under clause ( 23D) of section 10 or
from the specified company referred to in the Explanation  to clause ( 35) of section 10 shall, at the time of
credit of such income to the account of the payee or  at the time of payment thereof by any mode, whichever
is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of twenty per cent:
6[Provided that where an agreement referred to in sub-section (1) of section 90 or sub-section (1) of section
90A applies to the payee and if the payee has furnished a certificate referred to in sub-section (4) of section
90 or sub-section (4) of section 90A, as the case may be, then, income-tax thereon shall be deducted at the
rate of twenty per cent or at the rate or rates of income-tax provided in such agreement for such income,
whichever is lower.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no deduction of tax shall be made from any
income payable in respect of units of the Unit Trust of India to a non-resident Indian or a non-resident Hindu
undivided fa mily, where the units have been acquired from the Unit Trust of India out of the f unds in a
Non-resident (External) Account maintained with any bank in India or by remittance of funds in foreigncurrency, in accordance, in either case, with the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
(42 of 1999), and the rules made thereunder.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section—
(a) "foreign currency" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999 (42 of 1999);
(b) "non-resident Indian" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( e) of section 115C;
(c) "Unit Trust of India" means the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act,
1963 (52 of 1963);
(d) where any income as aforesaid is credited to any account, whether called "Suspense account" or by
any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting
shall be deemed to be credit of such income to  the account of the payee and the provisions of this
section shall apply accordingly.

6. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
680 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Income from units.

196B.  Where any income in respect of units referred to  in section 115AB or by way of long-term capital
gains arising from the transfer of such units is paya ble to an Offshore Fund, the person responsible for
making the payment shall, at the time of credit of such  income to the account of the payee or at the time of
payment thereof in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier,
deduct income-tax thereon 7-8[at the rate of—
(a) ten per cent in respect of income from units referred to in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section
115AB;
(b) ten per cent in respect of long-term capital gains arising from transfer of units referred to in section
115AB, which takes place before the 23rd day of July, 2024;
(c) twelve and one-half per cent in respect of long-term capital gains arising from transfer of units
referred to in section 115AB, which takes place on or after the 23rd day of July, 2024.]
7-8. Sub. for "at the rate of ten per cent." by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.
Income from foreign currency bonds or shares of Indian company.

196C.  Where any income by way of interest or dividends in respect of bonds or Global Depository Receipts
referred to in section 115AC or by way of long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of such bonds or
Global Depository Receipts is payable to a non-resident, the person responsible for making the payment
shall, at the time of credit of such income to the a ccount of the payee or at the time of payment thereof by
any mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon 7-8[at the rate of—
(a) ten per cent in respect of income by way of interest or dividends in respect of bonds or Global
Depository Receipts referred to in section 115AC;
(b) ten per cent in respect of long-term capital gains arising from transfer of such bond or Global
Depository Receipts referred to in section 115AC which takes place before the 23rd day of July,
2024;
(c) twelve and one-half per cent in respect of long-term capital gains arising from transfer of such bond
or Global Depository Receipts referred to in section 115AC which takes place on or after the 23rd
day of July, 2024.]
7-8. Sub. for "at the rate of ten per cent." by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
681 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Income of Foreign Institutional Investors from securities.

196D.  (1) Where any income in respect of securities referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of section
115AD,  not  being income  by  way  of  interest  referred  to  in  section  194LD,  is payable  to  a  Foreign
Institutional Investor, the person responsible for making the payment shall, at the time of credit of suchincome to the account of the payee or at the time of  payment thereof by any mode, whichever is earlier,
deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of twenty per cent:
Provided that where an agreement referred to in sub-section (1) of section 90 or sub-section (1) of section
90A applies to the payee and if the payee has furnished a certificate referred to in sub-section (4) of section
90 or sub-section (4) of section 90A, as the case may be, then, income-tax thereon shall be deducted at the
rate of twenty per cent or at the rate or rates of income-tax provided in such agreement for such income,
whichever is lower.
(1A) Where any income in respect of securities referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of section 115AD,
not being income by way of interest referred to in s ection 194LD, is payable to a specified fund referred to
in clause ( c) of the Explanation  to clause ( 4D) of section 10, the person responsible for making the payment
shall, at the time of credit of such income to the a ccount of the payee, or at the time of payment thereof by
any mode, whichever is earlier, deduct the income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent:
Provided that no deduction shall be made in respect of an income exempt under clause ( 4D) of section 10.
(2) No deduction of tax shall be made from any income , by way of capital gains arising from the transfer of
securities referred to in section 115AD, payable to a Foreign Institutional Investor.
Certificate for deduction at lower rate.

197. (1) Subject to rules made under sub-section (2A), wh ere, in the case of any income of any person or
sum payable to any person, income-tax is required to be deducted at the time of credit or, as the case may
be, at the time of payment at the rates in force under the provisions of sections 192, 193, 194, 194A, 194C,
194D, 194G, 194H, 194-I, 194J, 194K, 194LA, 
9[ 194LBA], 194LBB, 194LBC, 194M, 194-O, 10[ 194Q]
and 195, the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the to tal income of the recipient justifies the deduction of
income-tax at any lower rates or no deduction of income-tax, as the case may be, the Assessing Officer
shall,  on  an  application  made  by  the  assessee  in  this behalf,  give  to  him such  certificate  as may  beappropriate.
(2) Where any such certificate is given, the person responsible for paying the income shall, until such
certificate is cancelled by the Assessing Officer, deduct income-tax at the rates specified in such certificate
or deduct no tax, as the case may be.
(2A) The  Board may, having regard to the  convenience  of assessees and the  interests of revenue, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules specifying the cases in which, and the circumstances under
which, an application may be made for the grant of a certificate under sub-section (1) and the conditions
subject to which such certificate may be granted and providing for all other matters connected therewith.
(3) [***]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
682 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

9. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

10. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
No deduction to be made in certain cases.

197A.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 194 or section 194EE, no deduction of tax shall be
made under any of the said sections in the case of an i ndividual, who is resident in India, if such individual
furnishes to the person responsible for paying any income  of the nature referred to in section 194 or, as the
case may be, section 194EE, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form and verified in the
prescribed manner to the effect that the tax on his est imated total income of the previous year in which such
income is to be included in computing his total income will be nil.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 192A or section 193 or section 194A or section 194D or
section 194DA or section 194-I or section 194K, no deduc tion of tax shall be made under any of the said
sections in the case of a person (not being a compan y or a firm), if such person furnishes to the person
responsible for paying any income of the nature refe rred to in section 192A or section 193 or section 194A
or section 194D or section 194DA or section 194-I or section 194K, as the case may be, a declaration in
writing in duplicate in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner to the effect that the tax on
his estimated total income of the previous year in whic h such income is to be included in computing his total
income will be nil.
(1B) The provisions of this section shall not apply where the amount of any income of the nature referred to
in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A), as the case ma y be, or the aggregate of the amounts of such incomes
credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the previous year in which such income is to beincluded exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax.
(1C) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 192A or section 193 or section 194 or section 194A or
section 194D or section 194DA or section 194EE or s ection 194-I or section 194K or sub-section (1B) of
this section, no deduction of tax shall be made in the case of an individual resident in India, who is of the ageof sixty years or more at any time during the previous year, if such individual furnishes to the person
responsible for paying any income of the nature referr ed to in section 192A or section 193 or section 194 or
section 194A or section 194D or section 194DA or se ction 194EE or section 194-I or section 194K, as the
case may be, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
manner to the effect that the tax on his estimated total income of the previous year in which such income is
to be included in computing his total income will be nil.
(1D) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no deduction of tax shall be made by the Offshore
Banking Unit from the interest paid—
(a) on deposit made on or after the 1st day of April,  2005, by a non-resident or a person not ordinarily
resident in India; or
(b) on borrowing, on or after the 1st day of April, 2005, from a non-resident or a person not ordinarily
resident in India.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section "Offshore Banking Unit" shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause ( u) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005).
(1E) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, no deduction of tax shall be made from any
payment to any person for, or on behalf of, the New Pension System Trust referred to in clause ( 44) of
section 10.
(1F) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, no deduction of tax shall be made, or deduction of
tax shall be made at such lower rate, from such pa yment to such person or class of persons, includingINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
683 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
institution, association or body or class of institutions, associations or bodies, as may be notified by the
Central Government in the Official Gazette, in this behalf.
(2) The person responsible for paying any income of the nature referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section
(1A) or sub-section (1C) shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner one  copy  of the  declaration referred  to  insub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) or sub-section (1C) on or before the seventh day of the month next
following the month in which the declaration is furnished to him.
Lower deduction in certain cases for a limited period.

197B.  In case the provisions of sections 193, 194, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194DA, 194EE, 194F, 194G, 194H,
194-I, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194-IC , 194J, 194K, 194LA, sub-section (1) of section 194LBA, clause ( i) of section
194LBB, sub-section (1) of section 194LBC, sections 194M and 194-O require deduction of tax at source
during the period commencing from the 14th day of May, 2020 to the 31st day of March, 2021, then
notwithstanding anything contained in these sections the deduction of tax shall be made at the rate being the
three-fourth of the rate specified in these sections.
T ax deducted is income received.

198. All sums deducted in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Chapter 
11[and income-tax paid
outside India, by way of  deduction, in respect of  which an assessee is allowed a credit against the tax
payable under this Act, ] shall, for the purpose of computing the income of an assessee, be deemed to be
income received :
Provided  that  the  sum being the  tax paid, under sub-s ection (1A) of section 192 for the  purpose  of
computing the income of an assessee, shall not be deemed to be income received:
Provided further  that the sum deducted in accordance with the provisions of section 194N for the purpose
of computing the income of an assessee, shall not be deemed to be income received.

11. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Credit for tax deducted.

199. (1) Any deduction made in accordance with the fo regoing provisions of this Chapter and paid to the
Central Government shall be treated as a payment of tax on behalf of the person from whose income the
deduction was made, or of the owner of the security, or of  the depositor or of the ow ner of property or of theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
684 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
unit-holder, or of the shareholder, as the case may be.
(2) Any sum referred to in sub-section (1A) of sect ion 192 and paid to the Central Government shall be
treated as the tax paid on behalf of the person in respect of whose income such payment of tax has been
made.
(3) The Board may, for the purposes of giving credit in respect of tax deducted or tax paid in terms of the
provisions of this Chapter, make such rules as may be necessary, including the rules for the purposes ofgiving credit to a person other than those referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) and also the
assessment year for which such credit may be given.
Duty of person deducting tax.

200. (1) Any person deducting any sum in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall pay
within the prescribed time, the sum so deducted to th e credit of the Central Government or as the Board
directs.
(2) Any person being an employer, referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 192 shall pay, within the
prescribed time, the tax to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs.
(2A) In case of an office of the Government, where the sum deducted in accordance with the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter or tax referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 192 has been paid to the credit of
the Central Government without the production of a challan, the Pay and Accounts Officer or the TreasuryOfficer or the Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officer or any other person, by whatever name called, who is
responsible for crediting such sum or tax to the credit of the Central Government, shall deliver or cause to be
delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority, or to  the person authorised by such authority, a statement
in  such  form,  verified  in  such  manner,  setting forth  such  particulars  and  within  such  time  as  may  be
prescribed.
(3) Any person deducting any sum on or after the 1st day of April, 2005 in accordance with the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter or, as the case may be, any person being an employer referred to in sub-section
(1A) of section 192 shall, after paying the tax deducted to the credit of the Central Government within the
prescribed time, prepare such statements for such period as may be prescribed and deliver or cause to be
delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority or the person authorised by such authority such statementin such form and verified in such manner and setting forth such particulars and within such time as may be
prescribed:
Provided  that the person may also deliver to the prescribed authority a correction statement for rectification
of any mistake or to add, delete or update the information furnished in the statement delivered under thissub-section in such form and verified in such manner as may be specified by the authority:
12-13[Provided further  that no correction statement shall be delivered after the expiry of six years from
the end of  the financial year  in which the statement referred to in sub-section (3) is required to be
delivered. ]
12-13.  Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
685 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Processing of statements of tax deducted at source12-13[and other statements ].

200A.  (1) Where a statement of tax deduction at source  or a correction statement has been made by a
person deducting any sum (hereafter referred to in this section as deductor) under section 200, such
statement shall be processed in the following manner, namely:—
(a) the sums deductible under this Chapter shall be computed after making the following adjustments,
namely:—
(i) any arithmetical error in the statement; or
(ii) an incorrect claim, apparent from any information in the statement;
(b) the interest, if any, shall be computed on the basis of the sums deductible as computed in the
statement;
(c) the fee, if any, shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of section 234E;
(d) the  sum payable  by, or the  amount  of refund due  to, the  deductor shall be  determined after
adjustment of the amount computed under clause ( b) and clause ( c) against any amount paid under
section 200 or section 201 or section 234E and any amount paid otherwise by way of tax orinterest or fee;
(e) an  intimation  shall  be  prepared  or  generated  and  sent  to  the  deductor  specifying the  sum
determined to be payable by, or the amount of refund due to, him under clause ( d); and
(f) the amount of refund due to the deductor in pursuance of the determination under clause ( d) shall
be granted to the deductor:
Provided  that no intimation under this sub-section shall be sent after the expiry of one year from the end of
the financial year in which the statement is filed.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, "an incorrect claim apparent from any information in
the statement" shall mean a claim, on the basis of an entry, in the statement—
(i) of  an  item,  which  is inconsistent  with  another  entry of the same or some  other item in such
statement;
(ii) in respect of rate of deduction of tax at source, where such rate is not in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of processing of statements under sub-section (1), the Board may make a scheme for
centralised processing of statements of tax deducted at  source to expeditiously determine the tax payable by,
or the refund due to, the deductor as required under the said sub-section.
14[(3) The Board may make a scheme for processing of statements made by any other person, not being a
deductor. ]
12-13.  Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

14. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
686 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Consequences of failure to deduct or pa y.

201. (1) Where any person, including the principal officer of a company,—
(a) who is required to deduct any sum in accordance with the provisions of this Act; or
(b) referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 192, being an employer,
does not deduct, or does not pay, or after so deducting fails to pay, the whole or any part of the tax, as
required by or under this Act, then, such person, shall, without prejudice to any other consequences which
he may incur, be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such tax:
Provided  that any person, including the principal officer of a company, who fails to deduct the whole or any
part of the tax in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter on the sum paid to a payee or on the sum
credited to the account of a payee shall not be deemed to  be an assessee in default in respect of such tax if
such payee—
(i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
(ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of income; and
(iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income,
and the person furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such form as may be prescribed:
Provided further  that no penalty shall be charged under sect ion 221 from such person, unless the Assessing
Officer is satisfied that such person, without good and sufficient reasons, has failed to deduct and pay such
tax.
(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), if any such person, principal officer or company
as is referred to in that sub-section does not deduct th e whole or any part of the tax or after deducting fails
to pay the tax as required by or under this Act, he or it shall be liable to pay simple interest,—
(i) at one per cent for every month or part of a month on the amount of such tax from the date on
which such tax was deductible to the date on which such tax is deducted; and
(ii) at one and one-half per cent for every month or pa rt of a month on the amount of such tax from the
date on which such tax was deducted to the date on which such tax is actually paid,
and  such  interest  shall be  paid  before  furnishing the  statement  in  accordance  with  the  provisions of
sub-section (3) of section 200:
Provided  that in case any person, including the principal officer of a company fails to deduct the whole or
any part of the tax in accordance with the provisions of  this Chapter on the sum paid to a payee or on the
sum credited to the account of a payee but is not deem ed to be an assessee in default under the first proviso
to sub-section (1), the interest under clause ( i) shall be payable from the date on which such tax was
deductible to the date of furnishing of return of income by such payee:
Provided further  that where an order is made by the Asse ssing Officer for the default under sub-section
(1), the interest shall be paid by the person in accordance with such order.
(2) Where the tax has not been paid as aforesaid after it  is deducted, the amount of the tax together with the
amount of simple interest thereon referred to in sub-se ction (1A) shall be a charge upon all the assets of the
person, or the company, as the case may be, referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) deeming a person to be an assessee in default for failure to
deduct the whole or any part of the tax from 15[any person, at any time after the expiry of six years ] from
the end of the financial year in which payment is made or credit is given or two years from the end of the
financial year in which the correction statement is delivered under the 16[first] proviso to sub-section (3) of
section 200, whichever is later.
(4) The provisions of sub-clause ( ii) of sub-section (3) of section 153 and of Explanation 1 to section 153
shall, so far as may, apply to the time limit prescribed in sub-section (3).
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expressi on "accountant" shall have the meaning assignedINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
687 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
to it in the Explanation to sub-section (2) of section 288.

15. Sub. for "a person resident in India, at any time  after the expiry of seven years" by Act No. 15 of
2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

16. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Deduction only one mode of recovery.

202. The power to recover tax by deduction under the foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall be without
prejudice to any other mode of recovery.
Certificate for tax deducted.

203. (1) Every person deducting tax in accordance with th e foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall, within
such period as may be prescribed from the time of credit or payment of the sum, or, as the case may be,
from the time of issue of a cheque or warrant for payment of any dividend to a shareholder, furnish to the
person to whose account such credit is given or to w hom such payment is made or the cheque or warrant is
issued, a certificate to the effect that tax has been deducted, and specifying the amount so deducted, the rate
at which the tax has been deducted and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) Every person, being an employer, referred to in sub- section (1A) of section 192 shall, within such period,
as may be prescribed, furnish to the person in respect of whose income such payment of tax has been made,a certificate to the effect that tax has been paid to  the Central Government, and specify the amount so paid,
the rate at which the tax has been paid and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) [***]
T ax deduction and collection account number.

203A.  (1) Every person, deducting tax or collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,
who has not been allotted a tax deduction account number or, as the case may be, a tax collection account
number, shall, within such time as may be prescribed, apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a"tax deduction and collection account number".
(2) Where a "tax deduction account number" or, as the case may be, a "tax collection account number" or a
"tax deduction and collection account number" has been allotted to a person, such person shall quote such
number—
(a) in all challans for the payment of any sum in accordance with the provisions of section 200 orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
688 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
sub-section (3) of section 206C;
(b) in all certificates furnished under section 203 or sub-section (5) of section 206C;
(ba) in all the statements prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 200 or sub-section (3) of section 206C;
(c) in all the returns, delivered in accordance with the provisions of section 206 or sub-section (5A) or
sub-section (5B) of section 206C to any income-tax authority; and
(d) in all other documents pertaining to such transactions as may be prescribed in the interests of
revenue.
(3) The  provisions of this section  shall not  apply  to  such person, as may be  notified by the  Central
Government in this behalf.
Furnishing of statement of tax deducted.

203AA.  [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2020, w .e.f. 1-6-2020. ]
Meaning of "person responsible for paying".

204. For the purposes of the foregoing provisions of th is Chapter and section 285, the expression "person
responsible for paying" means—
(i) in the case of payments of income chargeable under the head "Salaries", other than payments by
the Central Government or the Government of a State, the employer himself or, if the employer is a
company, the company itself, including the principal officer thereof;
(ii) in the case of payments of income chargeable under the head "Interest on securities", other than
payments made by or on behalf of the Central G overnment or the Government of a State, the local
authority, corporation or company, including the principal officer thereof;
(iia) in the case of any sum payable to a non-resident Indian, being any sum representing consideration
for the transfer by him of any foreign exchange asset, which is not a short-term capital asset, the
authorised person responsible for remitting such sum to the non-resident Indian or for creditingsuch sum to his Non-resident  (External)  Account  maintained in accordance  with the  Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), and any rules made thereunder;
(iib) in the case of furnishing of information relating  to payment to a non-resident, not being a company,
or to a foreign company of any sum, whether or not  chargeable under the provisions of this Act, the
payer himself, or, if the payer is a company, the company itself including the principal officer
thereof;
(iii) in the case of credit, or, as the case may be, payment of any other sum chargeable under the
provisions of this Act, the payer himself, or, if the payer is a company, the company itself including
the principal officer thereof;
(iv) in the case of credit, or as the case may be, payment of any sum chargeable under the provisions of
this Act made by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Government of a State, the
drawing and disbursing officer or any other person, by whatever name called, responsible forcrediting, or as the case may be, paying such sum;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
689 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(v) in the case of a person not resident in India, th e person himself or any person authorised by such
person or the agent of such person in India including any person treated as an agent under section163.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "non-resident Indian" and "foreign exchange asset"  shall have the meanings assigned to them in
Chapter XII-A;
(b) "authorised person" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 2 of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999).
Bar against direct demand on assessee.

205. Where tax is deductible at the source under the fore going provisions of this Chapter, the assessee shall
not be called upon to pay the tax himself to the extent to which tax has been deducted from that income.
Persons deducting tax to furnish prescribed returns.

206. (1) The prescribed person in the case of every office  of Government, the principal officer in the case of
every  company,  the  prescribed  person  in  the  case  of  every  local authority  or  other  public  body  or
association, every private employer and every other pers on responsible for deducting tax before the 1st day
of April, 2005 under the foregoing provisions of this Chap ter shall, within the prescribed time after the end
of each financial year, prepare and deliver or cause to be delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority or
such other authority or agency as may be prescribed, su ch returns in such form and verified in such manner
and setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed:
Provided  that the Board may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, frame a scheme for the
purposes of filing such returns with such other authority or agency referred to in this sub-section.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the person responsible for deducting tax under the
foregoing provisions of this Chapter other than the pres cribed person in the case of every office of the
Government and the principal officer in the case of ev ery company may, at his option, deliver or cause to be
delivered such return to the prescribed income-tax authority in accordance with such scheme as may be
specified by the Board in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions
as may be specified therein, on or before the prescribed time after the end of each financial year, on afloppy, diskette, magnetic cartridge tape, CD-ROM or any other computer readable media (hereinafter
referred to as the computer media) and in the manner as may be specified in that scheme :
Provided  that the prescribed person in the case of every office of Government and the principal officer in
the case of every company responsible for deducting tax under the foregoing provisions of this Chaptershall, deliver or cause to be delivered, within the pres cribed time after the end of each financial year, such
returns on computer media under the said scheme.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the  time  being in force, a  return  filed on
computer media  shall be  deemed  to be  a  return  for the  purposes of  this section and the  rules made
thereunder and shall be admissible in any proceedings th ereunder, without further proof of production of the
original, as evidence of any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein.
(4)  Where  the  Assessing Officer  considers that  the  return  delivered  or  caused  to  be  delivered  underINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
690 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
sub-section (2) is defective, he may intimate the defect to the person responsible for deducting tax or the
principal officer in the case of a company, as the case may be, and give him an opportunity of rectifying the
defect within a period of fifteen days from the date of  such intimation or within such further period which,
on an application made in this behalf, the Assessing Offi cer may, in his discretion, allow; and if the defect is
not rectified within the said period of fifteen days or , as the case may be, the further period so allowed, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision  of this Act, such return shall be treated as an
invalid return and the provisions of this Act shall apply as if such person had failed to deliver the return.
Furnishing of statement in respect of payment of any income to residents without deduction of tax.

206A.  (1) Any banking company or co-operative society or public company referred to in the proviso to
clause ( i) of sub-section (3) of section 194A responsible fo r paying to a resident any income not exceeding
forty thousand rupees, where the payer is a banking co mpany or a co-operative society, and five thousand
rupees in any other case by way of interest (other than  interest on securities), shall prepare such statement in
such form, containing such particulars, for such period, verified in such manner and within such time, as maybe prescribed, and deliver or cause to be delivered the said statement to the prescribed income-tax authority
or to the person authorised by such authority.
(2) The Board may require any person, other than a person mentioned in sub-section (1), responsible for
paying to a resident any income liable for deduction of tax at source under Chapter XVII, to prepare such
statement in such form, containing such particulars, for such period, verified in such manner and within such
time, as may be prescribed, and deliver or cause to  be delivered the said statement to the income-tax
authority or the authorised person referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The person responsible for paying to a resident an y income referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2) may also deliver to the income-tax authority referr ed to in sub-section (1), a correction statement for
rectification of any mistake or to add, delete or update the information furnished in the statement delivered
under the said sub-sections in such form and verified in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Requirement to furnish Permanent Account Number.

206AA.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, any person entitled to
receive any sum or income or amount, on which tax is deductible under Chapter XVIIB (hereafter referredto as deductee) shall furnish his Permanent Account Number to the person responsible for deducting such
tax (hereafter referred to as deductor), failing which tax shall be deducted at the higher of the following
rates, namely:—
(i) at the rate specified in the relevant provision of this Act; or
(ii) at the rate or rates in force; or
(iii) at the rate of twenty per cent:
Provided  that where the tax is required to be deducted under section 194-O, the provisions of clause ( iii)
shall apply as if for the words "twenty per cent", the words "five per cent" had been substituted:
Provided further that where the tax is required to be deducted under section 194Q, the provisions of clause
(iii) shall apply as if for the words "twenty per cent", the words "five per cent" had been substituted.
(2) No declaration under sub-section (1) or sub-sectio n (1A) or sub-section (1C) of section 197A shall beINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
691 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
valid unless the person furnishes his Permanent Account Number in such declaration.
(3) In case any declaration becomes invalid under s ub-section (2), the deductor shall deduct the tax at
source in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1).
(4) No certificate under section 197 shall be granted unless the application made under that section contains
the Permanent Account Number of the applicant.
(5) The deductee shall furnish his Permanent Account Number to the deductor and both shall indicate the
same in all the correspondence, b ills, vouchers and other documents which are sent to each other.
(6) Where the Permanent Account Number provided to the deductor is invalid or does not belong to the
deductee, it shall be deemed that the deductee has not furnished his Permanent Account Number to the
deductor and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply accordingly .
(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a non-resident, not being a company, or to a foreign
company, in respect of—
(i) payment of interest on long-term bonds as referred to in section 194LC; and
(ii) any other payment subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
Special provision for deduction of tax at source for non-filers of income-tax return.

206AB.17[Omitted by the Finance Act, 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .]

17. Prior to its omission, section 206AB, as Ins. by Act No. 13 of 2021, w.e.f. 1-7-2021 and later on
amended by Act No. 06 of 2022, w.e.f. 1-4-2022 and Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023, read as
under:
'206AB . Special provision for deduction of tax at source for non-filers of income-tax return. —(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other pr ovisions of this Act, where tax is required to be
deducted at source under the provisions of Chapter XVIIB, other than section 192, 192A, 194B,
194BA, 194BB, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194LBC, 194M or 194N on any sum or income or amount paid, or
payable or credited, by a person to a specified pers on, the tax shall be deducted at the higher of the
following rates, namely:—
(i) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act; or
(ii) at twice the rate or rates in force; or
(iii) at the rate of five per cent.
(2) If the provisions of section 206AA is applicable to a specified person, in addition to the provision
of this section, the tax shall be deducted at higher of the two rates provided in this section and in
section 206AA.
(3) For the purposes of this section "specified person" means a person who has not furnished the
return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous year immediately preceding thefinancial year in which tax is required to be deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the
return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139 has expired and the aggregate of tax deductedINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
692 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
at source and tax collected at source in his case is rupees fifty thousand or more in the said previous
year :
Provided that the specified person shall not include--
(i) a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India; or
(ii) a person who is not required to furnish the retu rn of income for the assessment year relevant to
the said previous year and is notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in thisbehalf.
Explanation. —For  the  purposes  of  this  sub-section,  the  expression  "permanent  establishment"
includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise is wholly or partly
carried on.'
Person paying dividend to certain residents without deduction of tax to furnish prescribed return.

206B.  [Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996, w .e.f. 1-10-1996. ]
BB.—Collection at source
Profits and gains from the business of trading in alcoholic liquor, forest produce, scrap, etc.

206C.  (1) Every person, being a seller shall, at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the buyer to
the account of the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer in cash or by the issue
of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, collect from the buyer of any goods of the
nature  specified  in  column  (2)  of  the  Table  below,  a  sum equal to  the  percentage,  specified  in  the
corresponding entry in column (3) of the said Table, of such amount as income-tax:
TABLE
Sl.
No.Nature of goods Percentage
(1) (2) (3)
(i) Alcoholic Liquor for human consumption One per cent
(ii) Tendu leaves Five per cent
(iii)Timber 
18[or any other forest produce (notbeing tendu leaves )] obtained under a
forest lease19[Two] per
cent
(iv) Timber obtained by any mode other than under a forest lease19[Two] per
cent
(v)20[***]
(vi) Scrap One per cent
(vii) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore One per cent:INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
693 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided  that every person, being a seller shall at the time, during the period beginning on the 1st day of
June,  2003  and  ending  on  the  day  immediately  preceding  the  date  on  which  the  Taxation  Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2003 comes into force, of debiting  of the amount payable by the buyer to the account of
the buyer or of receipt of such amount from the said buyer in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or byany other mode, whichever is earlier, collect from the buyer of any goods of the nature specified in column
(2) of the Table as it stood immediately before the 1st day of June, 2003, a sum equal to the percentage,
specified in the corresponding entry in column (3) of  the said Table, of such amount as income-tax in
accordance with the provisions of this section as they stood immediately before the 1st day of June, 2003.
21[Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, "forest produce" shall have the same meaning as
defined in any State Act for the time being in force, or in the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927) .]
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no collection of tax shall be made in the case of
a buyer, who is resident in India, if such buyer furnishes to the person responsible for collecting tax, a
declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner to the effectthat the  goods referred to in column (2) of the aforesaid Table  are to be  ut ilised  for  the  purposes of
manufacturing, processing or producing articles or thin gs or for the purposes of generation of power and not
for trading purposes.
(1B) The person responsible for collecting tax under this section shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the
Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner one copy
of the declaration referred to in sub-section (1A) on  or before the seventh day of the month next following
the month in which the declaration is furnished to him.
(1C) Every person, who grants a lease or a licence or en ters into a contract or otherwise transfers any right
or interest either in whole or in part in any parkin g lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry, to another person,
other than a public sector company (hereafter in this se ction referred to as "licensee or lessee") for the use
of such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purpose of business shall, at the time of debiting of
the amount payable by the licensee or lessee to the account  of the licensee or lessee or at the time of receipt
of such amount from the licensee or lessee in cash or by  the issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode,
whichever is earlier, collect from the licensee or lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the naturespecified in column (2) of the Table below, a sum equal to the percentage, specified in the corresponding
entry in column (3) of the said Table, of such amount as income-tax:
TABLE
Sl.
No.Nature of contract or licence or lease, etc. Percentage
(1) (2) (3)
(i) Parking lot Two per cent
(ii) Toll plaza Two per cent
(iii) Mining and quarrying Two per cent.
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of this sub-section, "min ing and quarrying" shall not include mining and
quarrying of mineral oil.
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of Explanation 1 , "mineral oil" includes petroleum and natural gas.
(1D) [***](1E) [***]
22[(1F) Every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of—
(i) a motor vehicle; or
(ii) any other goods, as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
694 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
of the value exceeding ten lakh rupees, shall, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect from the buyer,
a sum equal to one per cent of the sale consideration as income-tax. ]
(1G) Every person,—
(a)being an authorised dealer, who receives an amount, for remittance 23[***] from a buyer, being a
person remitting such amount 23[***] under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme of the Reserve
Bank of India;
(b) being a seller of an overseas tour program package, who receives any amount from a buyer, being
the person who purchases such package,
shall, at the time of debiting the amount payable by the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from
the said buyer, by any mode, whichever is earlier, collect from the buyer, a sum equal to 24[five] per cent of
such amount as income-tax:
Provided  that the authorised dealer shall not collect the sum, if the amount or aggregate of the amounts
being remitted by a buyer is less than 25[ten] lakh rupees in a financial year 26[***]:
Provided further  that the sum to be collected by an aut horised dealer from the buyer shall be equal to
27[twenty] per cent of the amount or aggregate of the amounts in excess of 25[ten] lakh rupees remitted by
the buyer in a financial year, where the amount being remitted 28[29[is for purposes other than] education or
medical treatment]:
30[Provided also that the authorised dealer shall not collect the sum if the amount being remitted out is a
loan obtained from any financial institution as defined in clause ( b) of sub-section (3) of section 80E, for
the purpose of pursuing any education: ]
31[Provided also  that the seller of an overseas tour programme  package shall collect a sum of twenty per
cent of the amount or aggregate of amounts in excess of 32[ten] lakh rupees received from the buyer in a
financial year:]
Provided also  that the authorised dealer shall not collect the sum on an amount in respect of which the sum
has been collected by the seller:
Provided also  that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply, if the buyer is,—
(i) liable to deduct tax at source under any other provision of this Act and has deducted such amount;
(ii) the  Central Government, a  State  Government, an embassy, a  High Commission, a  legation, a
commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign State, a local authority as defined in
the Explanation  to clause ( 20) of section 10 or any other person as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify fo r this purpose, subject to such conditions as may
be specified therein:
33[Provided also  that the sum to be collected under this sub-se ction on or after the 1st day of July, 2023 and
before the 1st day of October, 2023, shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of this sub-sectionas they stood on the 1st day of April, 2023.]
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(i) "authorised dealer" means a person authorised by the Reserve Bank of India under sub-section (1)
of section 10 of the Foreign Exchange Manageme nt Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) to deal in foreign
exchange or foreign security;
(ii) "overseas tour programme package" means any tour package which offers visit to a country or
countries or territory or territories outside India and includes expenses for travel or hotel stay or
boarding or lodging or any other expenditure of similar nature or in relationthere to.
(1H) Every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of any goods of the
value or aggregate of such value exceeding fifty lakh r upees in any previous year, other than the goods being
exported out of India or goods covered in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1F) or sub-section (1G) shall, at theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
695 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
time of receipt of such amount, collect from the buyer, a sum equal to 0.1 per cent of the sale consideratio n
exceeding fifty lakh rupees as income-tax:
Provided  that if the buyer has not provided the Permanen t Account Number or the Aadhaar number to the
seller, then the provisions of clause ( ii) of sub-section (1) of section 206CC shall be read as if for the words
"five per cent", the words "one per cent" had been substituted:
Provided further  that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at
source under any other provision of this Act on th e goods purchased by him from the seller and has
deducted such amount:
34[Provided also that nothing contained in the provisions of this sub-section shall apply from the 1st day of
April, 2025. ]
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "buyer" means a person who purchases any goods, but does not include,—
(A) the Central Government, a State Government, an embassy, a High Commission, legation,
commission, consulate and the trade representation of a foreign State; or
(B) a local authority as defined in the Explanation  to clause ( 20) of section 10; or
(C) a person importing goods into India or any other person as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for this purpose, subject to such conditionsas may be specified therein;
(b) "seller" means a person whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business carried on
by him exceed ten crore rupees during the financial year immediately preceding the financial yearin which the sale of goods is carried out, not be ing a person as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for this purpose, subject to such conditions as may be
specified therein.
(1-I) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to th e provisions of sub-section (1G) or sub-section (1H), the
Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the purpose of removing thedifficulty.
(1J) Every guideline  issued by the  Board under sub-section (1-I) shall be  laid before  each House  of
Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the person liable to collect the sum.
(2) The power to recover tax by collection under this se ction shall be without prejudice to any other mode of
recovery.
(3) Any person collecting any amount under this section shall pay within the prescribed time the amount so
collected to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs :
Provided  that the person collecting tax on or after th e 1st day of April, 2005 in accordance with the
foregoing provisions  of  this section  shall,  after  payi ng the  tax collected to  the  credit  of the  Central
Government within the prescribed time, prepare such st atements for such period as may be prescribed and
deliver or cause to be delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority, or the person authorised by such
authority, such statement in such form and verified in such manner and setting forth such particulars and
within such time as may be prescribed.
(3A)  In  case  of  an  office  of  the  Government,  where  the  amount  collected  under  sub-section  (1)  or
sub-section (1C) has been paid to the credit of the Central Government without the production of a challan,
the Pay and Accounts Officer or the Treasury Officer or the Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officer or any
other person, by whatever name called, who is responsible for crediting such tax to the credit of the CentralGovernment, shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority, or to the person
authorised by such authority, a statement in such form, verified in such manner, setting forth such particulars
and within such time as may be prescribed.
(3B) The person referred to in the proviso to sub-section (3) may also deliver to the prescribed authorityINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
696 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
under the said proviso, a correction statement for rectification of any mistake or to add, delete or update the
information furnished in the statement delivered under the said proviso in such form and verified in such
manner, as may be specified by the authority:
35[Provided that no correction statement shall be delivered after the expiry of six years from the end of
the financial year in which the statement referred to in the proviso to sub-section (3) is required to be
delivered. ]
(4) Any amount collected in accordance with the provisi ons of this section and paid to the credit of the
Central Government shall be deemed to be a payment of tax on behalf of the person from whom the amount
has been collected and credit shall be given to such person 36[or any other person eligible for credit ] for
the amount so collected in a particular assessment year in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed by
the Board from time to time.
(5) Every person collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of this section shall within such period as
may be prescribed from the time of debit or receipt of the amount furnish to the buyer or licensee or lessee
to whose account such amount is debited or from whom such payment is received, a certificate to the effect
that tax has been collected, and specifying the sum so collected, the rate at which the tax has been collected
and such other particulars as may be prescribed :
Provided that the prescribed income-tax authority or the pe rson authorised by such authority referred to in
sub-section (3) shall, within the prescribed time after the end of each financial year beginning on or after the
1st day of April, 2008, prepare and deliver to the buyer referred to in sub-section (1) or, as the case may be,to the licensee or lessee referred to in sub-section (1C), a statement in the prescribed form specifying the
amount of tax collected and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(5A) Every person collecting tax before the 1st day of April, 2005 in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall prepare within the prescribed time after the end of each financial year, and deliver or cause to
be delivered to the prescribed income-tax authority or such other authority or agency as may be prescribed
such returns in such form and verified in such manner and setting forth such particulars and within such time
as may be prescribed :
Provided that the Board may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, frame a scheme for the
purposes of filing such returns with such other authority or agency referred to in this sub-section.
(5B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (5A), any person collecting tax, other than in a case
where the seller is a company, the Central Government or a State Government, may at his option, deliver or
cause to be delivered such return to the prescribed income-tax authority in accordance with such scheme asmay be specified by the Board in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, on or before th e prescribed time after the end of each financial year,
on a floppy, diskette, magnetic cartridge tape, CD-ROM or any other computer readable media (hereinafterreferred to as the computer media) and in the manner as may be specified in that scheme:
Provided that  where  the  person  collecting tax  is  a  company  or  the  Central Government  or  a  State
Government, such person shall, in accordance with th e provisions of this section, deliver or cause to be
delivered, within the prescribed time after the end of each financial year, such returns on computer media
under the said scheme.
(5C) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a return filed on
computer media shall be deemed to be a return fo r the purposes of sub-section (5A) and the rules made
thereunder and shall be admissible in any proceedings made thereunder, without further proof of productionof the original, as evidence of any contents of the original or of any facts stated therein.
(5D) Where the Assessing Officer considers that the return delivered or caused to be delivered under
sub-section (5B) is defective, he  may intimate  the  defect  to the  person collecting tax and give  him an
opportunity of rectifying the defect within a period of fifteen days from the date of such intimation or within
such further period which, on an application made in th is behalf, the Assessing Officer may, in his discretion,
allow; and if the defect is not rectified within the said period of fifteen days or, as the case may be, theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
697 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
further period so allowed, then, notwithstanding anythi ng contained in any other provision of this Act, such
return shall be treated as an invalid return and the pr ovisions of this Act shall apply as if such person had
failed to deliver the return.
(6) Any person responsible  for collecting the  tax who fails to collect  the  tax in accordance  with the
provisions of this section, shall, notwithstanding such failure, be liable to pay the tax to the credit of theCentral Government in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3).
(6A) If any person responsible for collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of this section does not
collect the whole or any part of the tax or after colle cting, fails to pay the tax as required by or under this
Act, he shall, without prejudice to any other consequences which he may incur, be deemed to be an assesseein default in respect of the tax:
Provided  that any person responsible for collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1)
and sub-section (1C), who fails to collect the whole or  any part of the tax on the amount received from a
buyer or licensee or lessee or on the amount debited to the account of the buyer or licensee or lessee shallnot be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such tax if such buyer or licensee or lessee—
(i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
(ii) has taken into account such amount for computing income in such return of income; and
(iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income,
and the person furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such form as may be prescribed:
Provided further  that no penalty shall be charged under section 221 from such person unless the Assessing
Officer is satisfied that the person has without good and sufficient reasons failed to collect and pay the tax.
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (6), if the person responsible for collecting tax does
not collect the tax or after collecting the tax fails to pa y it as required under this section, he shall be liable to
pay simple 
37[interest—
(a) at the rate of one per cent for every month or part thereof on the amount of such tax from the
date on which such tax was collectible to the date on which such tax is collected; and
(b) at the rate of one and one-half per cent for ever y month or part thereof on the amount of such tax
from the date on which such tax was collected to the date on which such tax is actually paid,
and such interest shall be paid ] before furnishing the quarterly statement for each quarter in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (3):
Provided  that in case any person responsible for collectin g tax in accordance with the provisions of this
section, fails to collect the whole or any part of th e tax on the amount received from a buyer or licensee or
lessee or on the amount debited to the account of the buyer or licensee or lessee but is not deemed to be an
assessee in default under the first proviso of sub-section (6A), the interest shall be payable from the date on
which such tax was collectible to the date of furnishi ng of return of income by such buyer or licensee or
lessee:
Provided further  that where an order is made by the Asse ssing Officer for the default under sub-section
(6A), the interest shall be paid by the person in accordance with such order.
38[(7A) No order shall be made under sub-section (6A) deeming a person to be an assessee in default for
failure to collect the whole or any part of the tax from  any person, at any time after the expiry of six years
from the end of the financial year in which tax was collectible or two years from the end of the financialyear in which the correction statement is delivered under sub-section (3B), whichever is later: ]
39[Provided that the provisions of sub-sections (3), (5) and (6) of section 153 and Explanation 1  thereof
shall, so far as may be, apply to the time limit specified in this sub-section. ]
(8) Where the tax has not been paid as aforesaid, after it is collected, the amount of the tax together with the
amount of simple interest thereon referred to in sub-section (7) shall be a charge upon all the assets of the
person responsible for collecting tax.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
698 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(9) Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the to tal income of the buyer or licensee or lessee justifies
the  collection  of  the  tax  at  any  lower  rate  than  the  relevant  rate  specified  in  40[sub-section (1) 41[or
sub-section (1C) ]], the Assessing Officer shall, on an applic ation made by the buyer or licensee or lessee in
this behalf, give to him a certificate for collection of tax at such lower rate than the relevant rate specified in
40[sub-section (1) 41[or sub-section (1C) ]].
(10) Where a certificate under sub-section (9) is given, the person responsible for collecting the tax shall,
until such certificate is cancelled by the Assessing Officer, collect the tax at the rates specified in suchcertificate.
(10A) In case the provisions of sub-section (1) [except the goods referred at serial number ( i) i n th e
TABLE], 
42[(1C) or (1F) ] require collection of tax at source dur ing the period commencing from the 14th
day of May, 2020 to the  31st day of March, 2021, then, notwithstanding anything contained in these
sub-sections the collection of tax shall be made at th e rate being the three-fourth of the rate specified in
these sub-sections.
(11) The  Board may, having regard to the  convenience  of assessees and the  interests of revenue, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules specifying the cases in which, and the circumstances under
which, an application may be made for the grant of a certificate under sub-section (9) and the conditionssubject to which such certificate may be granted and providing for all other matters connected therewith.
43-45[(12)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in  this  section,  no  collection  of  tax  shall be  made  or
collection of tax shall be made at such lower rate in respect of specified transaction, from such person or
class of persons, including institution, association or body or class of institutions, associations or bodies, as
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette specify in this behalf.]
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "accountant" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Explanation to sub-section (2) of section
288;
(aa) "buyer" with respect to—
(i) sub-section (1) means a person who obtains in any sale, by way of auction, tender or any
other mode, goods of the nature specified in the Table in sub-section (1) or the right to
receive any such goods but does not include,—
(A) a public sector company, the Central Government, a State Government, and an
embassy,  a  High  Commission,  legation,  commission,  consulate  and  the  trade
representation, of a foreign State and a club; or
(B) a  buyer  in  the  retail  sale  of  such  goods  purchased  by  him  for  personal
consumption;
(ii) [***]
(iii) sub-section (1F) means a person who obtains in  any sale, goods of the nature specified in
the said sub-section, but does not include,—
(A) the  Central  Government,  a  State  Government  and  an  embassy,  a  High
Commission, legation, commission, consulate and the trade representation of a
foreign State; or
(B) a local authority as defined in Explanation to clause ( 20) of section 10; or
(C) a public sector company which is engaged in the business of carrying passengers.
(ab) [***]
(b) "scrap"  means waste  and scrap from the  manufacture  or mechanical
working of materials which is definitely not usable as such because of
breakage, cutting up, wear and other reasons;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
699 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c) "seller" with respect to sub-section (1) and sub-section (1F) means the
Central Government,  a  State  Government  or  any  local authority  orcorporation  or  authority  established  by  or  under  a  Central,  State  or
Provincial Act, or any company or firm or co-operative society and also
includes an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily whose  total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by
him exceed one crore rupees in case of business or fifty lakh rupees in
case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding thefinancial year in which the goods of the nature specified in the Table in
sub-section (1) are sold.

18. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .