98. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

99. Words "is not complete or it" omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.
1[Merger of charitable trusts or institutions in certain cases.

12AC. Where any trust or institution registered under section 12AB or approved under sub-clause ( iv) or
sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of section 10, as the case may be,
merges with another trust or institution, the provisions of Chapter XII-EB shall not apply if--
(a) the other trust or institution has same or similar objects;
(b) the other trust or institution is registered under section 12AA or section 12AB or approved under
sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of section
10, as the case may be; and
(c) the said merger fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
120 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

1. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.
Section 11 not to apply in certain cases.

13. (1) Nothing contained in section 11 or section 12 shall operate so as to exclude from the total income of
the previous year of the person in receipt thereof—
(a) any part of the income from the property held under a trust for private religious purposes which
does not enure for the benefit of the public;
(b) in the case of a trust for charitable purposes or a charitable institution created or established after
the  commencement  of  this  Act,  any  income  thereof  if  the  trust  or  institution  is  created  orestablished for the benefit of any particular religious community or caste;
(bb) [***]
(c) in the case of a trust for charitable or religious purposes or a charitable or religious institution, any
income thereof—
(i) if such trust or institution has been created or established after the commencement of this
Act and under the terms of the trust or the rule s governing the institution, any part of such
income enures, or
(ii) if any part of such income or any property of the trust or the institution (whenever created
or established) is during the previous year used or applied,
directly or indirectly for the benefit of any person referred to in sub-section (3), such part of
income as referred to in sub-clauses ( i) and ( ii):
Provided  that in the case of a trust or institution created or established before the commencement
of this Act, the provisions of sub-clause ( ii) shall not apply to any use or application, whether
directly or indirectly, of any part of such income  or any property of the trust or institution for the
benefit  of any person referred to in sub-sectio n (3), if such use  or application is by way of
compliance with a mandatory term of the trust or a mandatory rule governing the institution :
Provided further  that  in  the  case  of  a  trust  for  religious purposes or  a  religious institution
(whenever created or established) or a trust for charitable purposes or a charitable institutioncreated or established before the commencement of this Act, the provisions of sub-clause ( ii) shall
not apply to any use or application, whether direct ly or indirectly, of any part of such income or
any property of the trust or institution for the benefit of any person referred to in sub-section (3) inso far as such use or application relates to any period before the 1st day of June, 1970;
(d) in the case of a trust for charitable or religious purposes or a charitable or religious institution, any
income thereof, if for any period during the previous year—
(i) any  funds of  the  trust  or  institution are  invested or  deposited after  the  28th day of
February, 1983 otherwise than in any one or more of the forms or modes specified in
sub-section (5) of section 11; or
(ii) any funds of the trust or institution invested or deposited before the 1st day of March,
1983 otherwise than in any one or more of th e forms or modes specified in sub-section (5)
of section 11 continue to remain so invested or deposited after the 30th day of November,1983; or
(iii) any shares in a company, other than—
(A) shares in a public sector company;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
121 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(B) shares  prescribed  as  a  form  or  mode  of  investment  under  clause  ( xii) o f
sub-section (5) of section 11,
are held by the trust or institution after the 30th day of November, 1983, to the extent of such
deposits or investments referred to in sub-clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii):
Provided  that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to—
(i) any assets held by the trust or institution wher e such assets form part of the corpus of the
trust or institution as on the 1st day of June, 1973;
(ia) any accretion to the shares, forming part of the corpus mentioned in clause ( i), by way of
bonus shares allotted to the trust or institution;
(ii) any assets (being debentures issued by, or  on behalf of, any company or corporation)
acquired by the trust or institution before the 1st day of March, 1983;
(iia) any asset, not being an investment or deposit in any of the forms or modes specified in
sub-section (5) of section 11, where such asse t is not held by the trust or institution,
otherwise than in any of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of section 11,after the expiry of one year from the end of  the previous year in which such asset is
acquired or the 31st day of March, 1993, whichever is later;
(iii) any funds representing the profits and gains of business, being profits and gains of any
previous year relevant to the assessment year  commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984 or
any subsequent assessment year.
Explanation. —Where the trust or institution has any other income in addition to profits
and gains of business, the provisions of clause ( iii) of this proviso shall not apply unless the
trust or institution maintains separate books of account in respect of such business;
2[(iv)any asset referred to in sub-clauses ( i), (ia) and ( ii) of clause ( b) of the third proviso to
clause ( 23C) of section 10 or any accretion to the shares, forming part of the corpus
mentioned in the said sub-clauses ( i) and ( ia) and voluntary contributions referred to in
sub-clause ( iv) of clause ( b) of the said proviso.]
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( c), in determining whether any part of the
income or any property of any trust or institution is during the previous year used or applied, directly orindirectly, for the benefit of any person referred to in sub-section (3), in so far as such use or application
relates to any period before the 1st day of July, 1972, no  regard shall be had to the amendments made to this
section by section 7 [other than sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a) thereof] of the Finance Act, 1972.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of clause ( c) and clause ( d) of sub-section (1), the
income or the property of the trust or institution or any part of such income or property shall, for the
purposes of that clause, be deemed to have been used or applied for the benefit of a person referred to in
sub-section (3),—
(a) if any part of the income or property of the trust or institution is, or continues to be, lent to any
person  referred  to  in  sub-section  (3)  for  any  period  during the  previous year  without  either
adequate security or adequate interest or both;
(b) if any land, building or other property of the trust or institution is, or continues to be, made
available for the use of any person referred to in sub-section (3), for any period during the previousyear without charging adequate rent or other compensation;
(c) if any amount is paid by way of salary, allowance or otherwise during the previous year to any
person referred to in sub-section (3) out of the resources of the trust or institution for services
rendered by that person to such trust or institutio n and the amount so paid is in excess of what may
be reasonably paid for such services;
(d) if the services of the trust or institution are made available to any person referred to in sub-section
(3) during the previous year without adequate remuneration or other compensation;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
122 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(e) if any share, security or other property is purchased by or on behalf of the trust or institution from
any person referred to in sub-section (3) during the previous year for consideration which is morethan adequate;
(f) if any share, security or other property is sold by  or on behalf of the trust or institution to any
person referred to in sub-section (3) during the previous year for consideration which is less thanadequate;
(g) if any income or property of the trust or institution is diverted during the previous year in favour of
any person referred to in sub-section (3):
Provided  that this clause shall not apply where the income, or the value of the property or, as the
case may be, the ag g reg ate of the income and the value of the property, so diverted does not
exceed one thousand rupees;
(h) if any funds of the trust or institution are, or c ontinue to remain, invested for any period during the
previous year (not being a period before the 1st day of January, 1971), in any concern in which any
person referred to in sub-section (3) has a substantial interest.
(3) The persons referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) are the following, namely :—
(a) the author of the trust or the founder of the institution;
3[(b)any person whose total contribution to the trust or institution, during the relevant previous year
exceeds one lakh rupees, or, in aggregate up to the end of the relevant previous year exceeds tenlakh rupees, as the case may be; ]
(c) where such author, founder or person is a Hindu undivided fa mily, a member of the family;
(cc) any trustee of the trust or manager (by whatever name called) of the institution;
(d)any relative of any such author, founder, 
4[***] member, trustee or manager as aforesaid;
(e)any concern in which any of the persons referred to in clauses ( a), 5[***] (c), (cc) and ( d) has a
substantial interest.
(4)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in  clause  ( c)  of  sub-section  (1)  but  without  prejudice  to  the
provisions contained in clause ( d) of that sub-section, in a case where the aggregate of the funds of the trust
or institution invested in a concern in which any person referred to in sub-section (3) has a substantial
interest, does not exceed five per cent of the capital of that concern, the exemption under section 11 orsection 12 shall not be denied in relation to any income other than the income arising to the trust or the
institution from such investment, by reason only that the funds of the trust or the institution have been
invested in a concern in which such person has a substantial interest.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( d) of sub-section (1), where any assets (being debentures
issued by, or on behalf of, any company or corporation)  are acquired by the trust or institution after the 28th
day of February, 1983 but before the 25th day of July, 1991, the exemption under section 11 or section 12
shall not be denied in relation to any income other than  the income arising to the trust or the institution from
such assets, by reason only that the funds of the trust or  the institution have been invested in such assets if
such funds do not continue to remain so invested in such assets after the 31st day of March, 1992.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), but without prejudice to the
provisions contained in sub-section (2) of section 12, in  the case of a charitable or religious trust running an
educational institution or a medical institution or a hospital, the exemption under section 11 or section 12
shall not be denied in relation to any income, other th an the income referred to in sub-section (2) of section
12, by reason only that such trust has provided educational or medical facilities to persons referred to inclause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( cc) or clause ( d) of sub-section (3).
(7) Nothing contained in section 11 or section 12 shall operate so as to exclude from the total income of the
previous year of the person in receipt thereof, an y anonymous donation referred to in section 115BBC on
which tax is payable in accordance with the provisions of that section.
(8) Nothing contained in section 11 or section 12 shal l operate so as to exclude any income from the totalINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
123 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
income of the previous year of the person in receipt thereof if the provisions of the first proviso to clause
(15) of section 2 become applicable in the case of such person in the said previous year.
(9) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) of section 11 shall operate so as to exclude any income from the
total income of the previous year of a person in receipt thereof, if—
(i) the statement referred to in clause ( a) of the said sub-section in respect of such income is not
furnished on or before the due date specified under sub-section (1) of section 139 for furnishing the
return of income for the previous year; or
(ii) the return of income for the previous year is not  furnished by such person on or before the due date
specified under sub-section (1) of section 139 for furnishing the return of income for the said
previous year.
(10) Where the provisions of sub-section (8) are applicable to any trust or institution or it violates the
conditions specified under clause ( b) or clause ( ba) of sub-section (1) of section 12A, its income chargeable
to tax shall be computed after allowing deduction for the expenditure (other than capital expenditure)
incurred in India, for the objects of the trust or institution, subject to fulfilment of the following c onditions,
namely:—
(a) such expenditure is not from the corpus standing to the credit of the trust or institution as on the
end of the financial year immediately preceding the previous year relevant to the assessment yearfor which income is being computed;
(b) such expenditure is not from any loan or borrowing;
(c) claim of depreciation is not  in respect of an asset, acquisition of which has been claimed as
application of income, in the same or any other previous year; and
(d) such expenditure is not in the form of any contribution or donation to any person.
Explanation. —For the  purposes of determining the  amount  of expenditure  under this sub-section, the
provisions of sub-clause ( ia) of clause ( a) of section 40 and sub-sections (3) and (3A) of section 40A, shall,
mutatis mutandis,  apply as they apply in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits and gains
of business or profession".
(11) For the purposes of computing income chargeable  to tax under sub-section (10), no deduction in respect
of any expenditure or allowance or set-off of any loss shall be allowed to the assessee under any other
provision of this Act.
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of sections 11, 12, 12A, 12AA, 12AB and this section, "trust" includes
any other legal obligation and for the purposes of this section "relative", in relation to an individual, means—
(i) spouse of the individual;
(ii) brother or sister of the individual;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(iv) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
(vi) spouse of a person referred to in sub-clause ( ii), sub-clause ( iii), sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v);
(vii) any lineal descendant  of  a  brother  or  sister  of  either  the  individual or  of  the  spouse  of  the
individual.
Explanation 2. —A trust or institution created or established for the benefit of Scheduled Castes, backward
classes, Scheduled Tribes or women and children shall not be deemed to be a trust or institution created or
established for the benefit of a religious community or caste within the meaning of clause ( b) of sub-section
(1).
Explanation 3.
—For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in a
concern,—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
124 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(i) in a case where the concern is a company , if its shar es (not being shares entitled to a fixed rate of
dividend whether with or without a further right to participate in profits) carrying not less than
twenty per cent of the voting power are, at any time during the previous year, owned beneficially
by such person or partly by such person and partly by one or more of the other persons referred to
in sub-section (3);
(ii) in the case of any other concern, if such person is  entitled, or such person and one or more of the
other persons referred to in sub-section (3) are entitled in the aggregate, at any time during the
previous year, to not less than twenty per cent of the profits of such concern.

2. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

3. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Prior to its substitution, clause ( b), as amended by the Act
No. 41 of 1975, w.e.f. 1-4-1977, Act No. 67 of 1984, w.e.f. 1-4-1985 and Act No. 32 of 1994, w.e.f.
1-4-1995, read as under:
"(b) any person who has made a substantial contribution to the trust or institution, that is to say, any
person whose  total contribution up to the  end of the  relevant  previous year exceeds fiftythousand rupees;"

4. Word "person," omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

5. Word "( b)," omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.
Special provision relating to incomes of political parties.

13A.  Any income of a political party which is charg eable under the head "Income from house property" or
"Income from other sources" or "Capital gains" or any income by way of voluntary contributions received
by a political party from any person shall not be included in the total income of the previous year of suchpolitical party :
Provided  that—
(a) such political party keeps and maintains such books of account and other documents as would
enable the Assessing Officer to properly deduce its income therefrom;
(b) in respect of each such voluntary contribution other than contribution by way of electoral bond in
excess of twenty thousand rupees, such political party keeps and maintains a  record of suchcontribution and the name and address of the person who has made such contribution;
(c) the accounts of such political party are audited by an accountant as defined in the Explanation
below sub-section (2) of section 288; and
(d) no donation exceeding two thousand rupees is received by such political party otherwise than by an
account payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account payee bank draft or use of electronic
clearing system through  a  bank  account  or  through  such  other  electronic  mode  as  may  beprescribed or through electoral bond.
Explanation.— For  the  purposes  of  this  proviso,  "elector al  bond"  means  a  bond  referred  to  in  the
Explanation  to sub-section (3) of section 31 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934):
Provided further  that if the treasurer of such political party or any other person authorised by that politicalINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
125 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
party in this behalf fails to submit a report under sub-se ction (3) of section 29C of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) for a financial year, no exemption under this section shall be available for
that political party for such financial year:
Provided also that such political party furnishes a return of income for the previous year in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section (4B) of section 139 on or before the due date under that section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "political party" means a political party registered under
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951).
Special provisions relating to voluntary contributions received by electoral trust.

13B. Any voluntary contributions received by an electoral trust shall not be included in the total income of
the previous year of such electoral trust, if—
(a) such  electoral  trust  distributes  to  any  political  party,  registered  under  section  29A  of  the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) , during the said previous year, ninety-five per
cent of the aggregate donations received by it durin g the said previous year along with the surplus,
if any, brought forward from any earlier previous year; and
(b) such electoral trust functions in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government.
CHAPTER IV
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME
Heads of income
Heads of income.

14. Save as otherwise provided by this Act, all income shall, for the purposes of charge of income-tax and
computation of total income, be classified under the following heads of income :—
A.—Salaries.
B.—[***]
C.—Income from house property.
D.—Profits and gains of business or profession.
E.—Capital gains.
F.—Income from other sources.
Expenditure incurred in relation to income not includible in total income.

14A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, for the purposes of computing the
total income under this Chapter, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of expenditure incurred by the
assessee in relation to income which does not form part of the total income under this Act.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
126 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(2) The Assessing Officer shall determine the amount of expenditure incurred in relation to such income
which does not form part of the total income under this Act in accordance with such method as may be
prescribed, if the AssessingOfficer, having regard to the accounts of the assessee, is not satisfied with the
correctness of the claim of the assessee in respect of such expenditure in relation to income which does notform part of the total income under this Act.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall also apply in relation to a case where an assessee claims that no
expenditure has been incurred by him in relation to income which does not form part of the total income
under this Act :
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall empower the Assessing Officer either to reassess under
section 147 or pass an order enhancing the assessment or reducing a refund already made or otherwise
increasing the liability of the assessee under section 154, for any assessment year beginning on or before the
1st day of April, 2001.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this Act, the provisions of this section shall apply and shall be deemed to have always applied in
a case where the income, not forming part of the total income under this Act, has not accrued or arisen or
has not been received during the previous year releva nt to an assessment year and the expenditure has been
incurred during the said previous year in relation to such income not forming part of the total income.
A.—Salaries
Salaries.

15. The following income shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head "Salaries"—
(a) any salary due from an employer or a former empl oyer to an assessee in the previous year, whether
paid or not;
(b) any salary paid or allowed to him in the previous year by or on behalf of an employer or a former
employer though not due or before it became due to him;
(c) any arrears of salary paid or allowed to him in the previous year by or on behalf of an employer or
a former employer, if not charged to income-tax for any earlier previous year.
Explanation 1 .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any salary paid in advance is
included in the total income of any person for any prev ious year it shall not be included again in the total
income of the person when the salary becomes due.
Explanation 2. —Any salary, bonus, co mmission or remuneration, by whatever name called, due to, or
received by, a partner of a firm from the firm shall not be regarded as "salary" for the purposes of thissection.
Deductions from salaries.

16.  The  income  chargeable  under  the  head  "Salaries"  shall be  computed  after  making the  following
deductions, namely :—
(i) [***]
(ia) a deduction of fifty thousand rupees or the amount of the salary, whichever is less:INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
127 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
6[Provided that in a case where income-tax is computed under clause ( ii) of sub-section (1A) of
section 115BAC, the provisions of this clause shall have effect as if for the words "fifty thousand
rupees", the words "seventy-five thousand rupees" had been substituted; ]
(ii) a deduction in respect of any allowance in the nature of an entertainment allowance specifically
granted by an employer to the assessee who is in receipt of a salary from the Government, a sum
equal to one-fifth of his salary (exclusive of any allowance, benefit or other perquisite) or fivethousand rupees, whichever is less;
(iii) a deduction of any sum paid by the assessee on account of a tax on employment within the
meaning of clause ( 2) of article 276 of the Constitution, leviable by or under any law.
(iv) [***]
(v) [***]

6. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
"Salary", "perquisite" and "profits in lieu of salary" defined.

17. For the purposes of sections 15 and 16 and of this section,—
(1) "salary" includes—
(i)w a g e s ;
(ii) any annuity or pension;
(iii) any gratuity;
(iv) any fees, commissions, perquisites or profits in lieu of or in addition to any salary or wages;
(v) any advance of salary;
(va) any payment received by an employee in respect of any period of leave not availed of by him;
(vi) the annual accretion to the balance at the credit of an employee participating in a recognised
provident fund, to the extent to which it is char geable to tax under rule 6 of Part A of the Fourth
Schedule;
(vii) the aggregate of all sums that are comprised in the transferred balance as referred to in sub-rule (2)
of rule 11 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule of an employee participating in a recognised provident
fund, to the extent to which it is chargeable to tax under sub-rule (4) thereof; and
(viii) the contribution made by the Central Government  or any other employer in the previous year, to
the account of an employee under a pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD;
7[(ix)the contribution made by the Central Government in the previous year, to the Agniveer Corpus
Fund account of an individual enrolled in the Agnipath Scheme referred to in section 80CCH;]
(2) "perquisite" includes—
(i)the value of rent-free accommodation provided to the assessee by his employer 8[computed in such
manner as may be prescribed];
9[(ii)the value of any accommodation provided to the assessee by his employer at a concessional rate.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
128 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-clause, it is clarified that accommodation shall be
deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate, if the value of accommodation computed insuch manner as may be prescribed, exceeds the rent recoverable from, or payable by, the assessee;]
(iii) the value of any benefit or amenity granted or provided free of cost or at concessional rate in any
of the following cases—
(a) by a company to an employee who is a director thereof;
(b) by  a  company  to  an  employee  being a  person  who  has a  substantial interest  in  the
company;
(c) by  any  employer  (including a  company)  to  an  employee  to  whom the  provisions of
paragraphs ( a) and ( b) of this sub-clause do not apply and whose income under the head
"Salaries" (whether due from, or paid or allowed by, one or more employers), exclusive ofthe value of all benefits or amenities not provided for by way of monetary payment,
exceeds 
10[fifty thousand rupees ]:
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby decl ared that the use of any vehicle provided
by a company or an employer for journey by the assessee from his residence to his office or otherplace of work, or from such office or place to hi s residence, shall not be regarded as a benefit or
amenity granted or provided to him free of cost or at concessional rate for the purposes of this
sub-clause;
(iiia) [***]
(iv) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any obligation which, but for such payment, would
have been payable by the assessee;
(v) any sum payable by the employer, whether direct ly or through a fund, other than a recognised
provident fund or an approved superannuation fund  or a Deposit-linked Insurance Fund established
under section 3G of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 (46 of1948), or, as the case may be, section 6C of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), to effect an assu rance on the life of the assessee or to effect a
contract for an annuity;
(vi) the  value  of any specified security or sweat  equity shares allotted or transferred, directly or
indirectly, by the employer, or former employer, free of cost or at concessional rate to the assessee.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-clause,—
(a) "specified security" means the securities as defined in clause ( h) of s ecti on 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and, where employees' stock
option has been granted under any plan or scheme therefor, includes the securities offeredunder such plan or scheme;
(b) "sweat  equity shares"  means equity shares issued by a  company to its employees or
directors at a discount or for consideratio n other than cash for providing know-how or
making available rights in the nature of intellectual property rights or value additions, by
whatever name called;
(c) the value of any specified security or sweat equity shares shall be the fair market value of
the specified security or sweat equity shares, as the case may be, on the date on which the
option  is  exercised  by  the  assessee  as  reduced  by  the  amount  actually  paid  by,  or
recovered from, the assessee in respect of such security or shares;
(d) "fair market value " means the value determined in accordance with the method as may be
prescribed;
(e) "option " means a right but not an obligation granted to an employee to apply for the
specified security or sweat equity shares at a predetermined price;
(vii) the amount or the aggregate of amounts of any c ontribution made to the account of the assessee byINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
129 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the employer—
(a) in a recognised provident fund;
(b) in the scheme referred to in sub-section (1) of section 80CCD; and
(c) in an approved superannuation fund,
to the extent it exceeds seven lakh and fifty thousand rupees in a previous year;
(viia) the annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of s imilar nature during the
previous year to the balance at the credit of the fund or scheme referred to in sub-clause ( vii) to the
extent it relates to the contribution referred to in  the said sub-clause which is included in total
income  under the  said sub-clause  in any previous year computed in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(viii) the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as may be prescribed:
Provided  that nothing in this clause shall apply to,—
(i) the value of any medical treatment provided to an employee or any member of his family in any
hospital maintained by the employer;
(ii) any sum paid by the employer in respect of an y expenditure actually incurred by the employee on
his medical treatment or treatment of any member of his family—
(a) in any hospital maintained by the Government or any local authority or any other hospital
approved by the Government for the purposes of medical treatment of its employees;
(b) in respect of the prescribed diseases or ailments, in any hospital approved by the Principal
Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner having regard to the prescribed guidelines:
Provided  that, in a case falling in sub-clause ( b), the employee shall attach with his return
of  income  a  certificate  from the  hospital specifying the  disease  or  ailment  for  which
medical treatment was required and the receipt for the amount paid to the hospital;
(c) in respect of any illness relating to COVID-19 subject to such c onditions as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(iii) any portion of the premium paid by an employer in relation to an employee, to effect or to keep in
force an insurance on the health of such employee under any scheme approved by the CentralGovernment  or  the  Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority  established  under
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41
of 1999), for the purposes of clause ( ib) of sub-section (1) of section 36;
(iv) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any pr emium paid by the employee to effect or to keep
in force an insurance on his health or the health of any member of his family under any scheme
approved by the Central Government or the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authorityestablished  under  sub-section  (1)  of section  3  of the  Insurance  Regulatory  and Development
Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999), for the purposes of section 80D;
(v) [***]
(vi) any expenditure incurred by the employer on—
(1) medical treatment  of  the  employee,  or  any  member  of  the  family  of  such  employee,
outside India;
(2) travel and stay abroad of the employee or any member of the family of such employee for
medical treatment;
(3) travel and stay abroad of one attendant who accompanies the patient in connection with
such treatment,
subject to the condition that—
(A) the expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad shall be excluded from perquisiteINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
130 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
only to the extent permitted by the Reserve Bank of India; and
(B) the  expenditure  on  travel shall be  excluded  from perquisite  only  in  the  case  of  an
employee  whose  gross  total  income,  as  computed  before  including therein  the  said
expenditure, does not exceed 11[two lakh rupees ];
(vii) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any expenditure actually incurred by the employee for
any of the purposes specified in clause ( vi) subject to the conditions specified in or under that
clause :
Provided further that for the assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2002, nothing
contained in this clause shall apply to any employee whose income under the head "Salaries"(whether due from, or paid or allowed by, one or  more employers) exclusive of the value of all
perquisites not provided for by way of monetary payment, does not exceed one lakh rupees.
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( 2),—
(i) "hospital" includes a dispensary or a clinic or a nursing home;
(ii) "family", in relation to an individual, shall have  the  same  meaning as in clause  ( 5) o f
section 10; and
(iii) "gross total income" shall have the same meaning as in clause ( 5) of section 80B;
(3) "profits in lieu of salary" includes—
(i) the amount of any compensation due to or received by an assessee from his employer or former
employer at or in connection with the termination of his employment or the modification of theterms and conditions relating thereto;
(ii) any payment (other than any payment referred to in clause ( 10), clause ( 10A), clause ( 10B), clause
(11), clause ( 12), clause ( 13) or clause ( 13A) of section 10), due to or received by an assessee from
an employer or a former employer or from a provident  or other fund, to the extent to which it does
not consist of contributions by the assessee or interest on such contributions or any sum received
under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause, the expression "Keyman insurance policy" shall
have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 10D) of section 10;
(iii) any amount due to or received, whether in lump sum or otherwise, by any assessee from any
person—
(A) before his joining any employment with that person; or
(B) after cessation of his employment with that person.

7. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

8. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

9. Sub, by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

10. Words "such amount as may be prescribed" shall be  sub. for "fifty thousand rupees" by Act No. 7 of
2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.

11. Words "such amount as may be prescribed" shall be sub. for "two lakh rupees" by Act No. 7 of 2025,
w.e.f. 1-4-2026.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
131 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
C.—Income from house property
Income from house property.

22. The annual value of property consisting of any build ings or lands appurtenant thereto of which the
assessee is the owner, other than such portions of su ch property as he may occupy for the purposes of any
business or profession carried on by him the  profit s of which are chargeable to income-tax, shall be
chargeable to income-tax under the head "Income from house property".
Annual value how determined.

23. (1) For the purposes of section 22, the annual value of any property shall be deemed to be—
(a) the sum for which the property might reasonably be expected to let from year to year; or
(b) where the property or any part of the property is let and the actual rent received or receivable by
the owner in respect thereof is in excess of the sum referred to in clause ( a), the  amount  so
received or receivable; or
(c) where the property or any part of the property is let and was vacant during the whole or any part of
the previous year and owing to such vacancy the ac tual rent received or receivable by the owner in
respect thereof is less than the sum referred to in clause ( a), the amount so received or receivable :
Provided  that  the  taxes  levied  by  any  local authorit y  in  respect  of  the  property  shall be  deducted
(irrespective  of  the  previous year  in  which  the  liability  to  pay  such  taxes was incurred  by  the  owneraccording to the method of accounting regularly empl oyed by him) in determining the annual value of the
property of that previous year in which such taxes are actually paid by him.
Explanation.— For the purposes of clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this sub-section, the amount of actual rent
received or receivable by the owner shall not include, s ubject to such rules as may be made in this behalf,
the amount of rent which the owner cannot realise.
12[(2) The annual value of the property consisting of a house or any part thereof shall be taken as nil, if
the owner occupies it for his own residence or cannot actually occupy it due to any reason. ]
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply if—
(a) the house or part of the house is actually let during the whole or any part of the previous year; or
(b) any other benefit therefrom is derived by the owner.
(4) Where the property referred to in sub-section (2) consists of more than two houses—
(a) the provisions of that sub-section shall apply only in respect of two of such houses, which the
assessee may, at his option, specify in this behalf;
(b) the annual value of the house or houses, other than the house or houses in respect of which the
assessee has exercised an option under clause ( a), shall be determined under sub-section (1) as if
such house or houses had been let.
(5) Where the property consisting of any building or land appurtenant thereto is held as stock-in-trade and
the property or any part of the property is not let during the whole or any part of the previous year, theannual value of such property or part of the property, for the period up to two years from the end of the
financial year in which the certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained from the
competent authority, shall be taken to be nil.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
132 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

12. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.  Prior to its substitution, sub-section (2) read as under :
"(2) Where the property consists of a house or part of a house which—
(a) is in the occupation of the owner for the purposes of his own residence; or
(b) cannot actually be occupied by the owner by re ason of the fact that owing to his employment,
business or profession carried on at any other place, he has to reside at that other place in a
building not belonging to him,
the annual value of such house or part of the house shall be taken to be nil."
Deductions from income from house property.

24. Income chargeable under the head "Income from house property" shall be computed after making the
following deductions, namely:—
(a) a sum equal to thirty per cent of the annual value;
(b) where  the  property  has  been  acquired,  constructed,  repaired,  renewed  or  reconstructed  with
borrowed capital, the amount of any interest payable on such capital:
Provided  that in respect of property referred to in sub-section (2) of section 23, the amount of
deduction or, as the case may be, the aggregate of  the amount of deduction shall not exceed thirty
thousand rupees :
Provided further  that where the property referred to in the first proviso is acquired or constructed
with capital borrowed on or after the 1st day of Ap ril, 1999 and such acquisition or construction is
completed within five years from the end of the financial year in which capital was borrowed, the
amount of deduction or, as the case may be, th e aggregate of the amounts of deduction under this
clause shall not exceed two lakh rupees.
Explanation.— Where the property has been acquired or constructed with borrowed capital, the
interest, if any, payable on such capital borrowed fo r the period prior to the previous year in which
the property has been acquired or constructed, as reduced by any part thereof allowed as deduction
under any other provision of this Act, shall be de ducted under this clause in equal instalments for
the said previous year and for each of the four immediately succeeding previous years:
Provided also that no deduction shall be  made under the second proviso unless the assessee
furnishes a certificate, from the person to whom any interest is payable on the capital borrowed,
specifying the amount of interest payable by the assessee for the purpose of such acquisition or
construction of the property, or, conversion of the whole or any part of the capital borrowed which
remains to be repaid as a new loan.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this proviso, the expression "new loan" means the whole or any
part  of a  loan taken by the  assessee  subseque nt  to the  capital borrowed, for the  purpose  of
repayment of such capital:
Provided also that the aggregate of the amounts of deduction under the first and second provisos
shall not exceed two lakh rupees.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
133 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Amounts not deductible from income from house propert y.

25. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 24, any interest chargeable under this Act which is
payable outside India (not being interest on a loan issued for public subscription before the 1st day of April,1938), on which tax has not been paid or deducted unde r Chapter XVII-B and in respect of which there is
no person in India who may be treated as an agent under section 163 shall not be deducted in computing the
income chargeable under the head "Income from house property".
Special provision for arrears of rent and unrealised rent received subsequently.

25A. (1) The amount of arrears of rent received from a tenant or the unrealised rent realised subsequently
from a tenant, as the case may be, by an assessee shall be deemed to be the income from house property inrespect of the financial year in which such rent is re ceived or realised, and shall be included in the total
income of the assessee under the head "Income from house property", whether the assessee is the owner of
the property or not in that financial year.
(2) A sum equal to thirty per cent of the arrears of re nt or the unrealised rent referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be allowed as deduction.
Property owned by co-owners.

26. Where property consisting of buildings or buildings and lands appurtenant thereto is owned by two or
more persons and their respective shares are definite and ascertainable, such persons shall not in respect of
such property be assessed as an association of persons, but the share of each such person in the income from
the property as computed in accordance with sections 22 to 25 shall be included in his total income.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, in applying the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 23
for computing the share of each such person as is referred to in this section, such share shall be computed, as
if each such person is individually entitled to the relief provided in that sub-section.
"Owner of house property", "annual charge", etc., defined.

27. For the purposes of sections 22 to 26—
(i) an individual who transfers otherwise than for adequate consideration any house property to his or
her spouse, not being a transfer in connection with an agreement to live apart, or to a minor child
not being a married daughter, shall be deemed to be the owner of the house property so transferred;
(ii) the holder of an impartible estate shall be deemed to be the individual owner of all the properties
comprised in the estate;
(iii) a member of a co-operative society, company or other association of persons to whom a building or
part  thereof  is allotted or  leased under a  house  building scheme  of  the  society, company  orassociation, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the owner of that building or part thereof;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
134 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iiia) a  person who is allowed to take  or retain possession of any building or part  thereof in part
performance of a contract of the nature referred to in section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act,1882 (4 of 1882), shall be deemed to be the owner of that building or part thereof;
(iiib) a person who acquires any rights (excluding any rights by way of a lease from month to month or
for a period not exceeding one year) in or with resp ect to any building or part thereof, by virtue of
any such transaction as is referred to in clause ( f) of section 269UA, shall be deemed to be the
owner of that building or part thereof;
(iv) [***]
(v) [***]
(vi) taxes levied by a local authority in respect of any property shall be deemed to include service taxes
levied by the local authority in respect of the property.
D.—Profits and gains of business or profession
Profits and gains of business or profession.

28. The following income shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head "Profits and gains of business or
profession",—
(i) the profits and gains of any business or professi on which was carried on by the assessee at any time
during the previous year ;
(ii) any compensation or other payment due to or received by,—
(a) any person, by whatever name called, managing the whole or substantially the whole of
the  affairs  of  an  Indian  company,  at  or  in  connection  with  the  termination  of  his
management or the modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto;
(b) any person, by whatever name called, managing the whole or substantially the whole of
the affairs in India of any other company, at or in connection with the termination of his
office or the modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto ;
(c) any person, by whatever name called, holding an agency in India for any part of the
activities  relating to  the  business  of  any  other  person,  at  or  in  connection  with  the
termination of the agency or the modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto ;
(d) any person, for or in connection with the vesting in the Government, or in any corporation
owned or controlled by the Government, under any law for the time being in force, of the
management of any property or business;
(e) any person, by whatever name called, at or in connection with the termination or the
modification of the terms and conditions, of any contract relating to his business;
(iii) income derived by a trade, professional or similar association from specific services performed for
its members;
(iiia) profits on sale of a licence granted under the Imports (Control) Order, 1955, made under the
Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 (18 of 1947);
(iiib) cash assistance (by whatever name called) received or receivable by any person against exports
under any scheme of the Government of India;
(iiic) any duty of customs or excise re-paid or re-payable as drawback to any person against exports
under the Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 1971;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
135 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iiid) any profit on the transfer of the Duty Entitl ement Pass Book Scheme, being the Duty Remission
Scheme under the export and import policy formulated and announced under section 5 of theForeign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992);
(iiie) any profit on the transfer of the Duty Free Replenishment Certificate, being the Duty Remission
Scheme under the export and import policy formulated and announced under section 5 of theForeign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992);
13[(iv)the  value  of  any  benefit  or  perquisite  arising from business or  the  exercise  of  a  profession,
whether--
(a) convertible into money or not; or
(b) in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind;]
(v) any interest, salary, bonus, co mmission or remuneration, by whatever name called, due to, or
received by, a partner of a firm from such firm :
Provided  that where any interest, salary, bonus, co mmission or remuneration, by whatever name
called, or any part thereof has not been allowed to be deducted under clause ( b) of section 40, the
income under this clause shall be adjusted to the extent of the amount not so allowed to be
deducted;
(va) any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, under an agreement for—
(a) not carrying out any activity in relation to any business or profession; or
(b) not sharing any know-how, patent, copyright, trade-mark, licence, franchise or any other
business or commercial right of similar nature or information or technique likely to assist inthe manufacture or processing of goods or provision for services:
Provided that sub-clause ( a) shall not apply to—
(i) any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of transfer of the
right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing or right to carry on any
business or profession, which is chargeable under the head "Capital gains";
(ii) any sum received as compensation, from the multilateral fund of the Montreal Protocol on
Substances  that  Deplete  the  Ozone  layer  under  the  United  Nations  Environment
Programme, in accordance with the terms of agreement entered into with the Government
of India.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) "agreement" includes any arrangement or understanding or action in concert,—
(A) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is formal or in writing;
or
(B) whether  or  not  such  arrangement,  understanding or  action  is intended  to  be
enforceable by legal proceedings;
(ii) "service" means service of any description which is made available to potential users and
includes  the  provision  of  services  in  connection  with  business  of  any  industrial  or
commercial nature such as accounting, banking, communication, conveying of news orinformation, advertising, entertainment, amusement, education, financing, insurance, chit
funds, real estate, construction, transport, storage, processing, supply of electrical or other
energy, boarding and lodging;
(vi) any sum received under a Keyman insurance po licy including the sum allocated by way of bonus
on such policy.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression "Keyman insurance policy" shall
have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 10D) of section 10;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
136 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(via) the fair market value of inventory as on the date  on which it is converted into, or treated as, a
capital asset determined in the prescribed manner;
(vii) any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of any capital asset (other
than  land  or  goodwill  or  financial  instrument)  being  demolished,  destroyed,  discarded  or
transferred, if the whole of the expenditure on such capital asset has been allowed as a deductionunder section 35AD.
Explanation 1. —[Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1989. ]
Explanation 2. —Where speculative transactions carried on by an assessee are of such a nature as to
constitute a business, the business (hereinafter referred to as "speculation business") shall be deemed to be
distinct and separate from any other business.
14[Explanation 3.— It is hereby clarified that any income from letting out of a residential house or a part
of  the house by the owner  shall not be chargeable under  the head "Profits and gains of  business or
profession" and shall be chargeable under the head "Income from house property". ]

13. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

14. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Income from profits and gains of business or profession, how computed.

29. The income referred to in section 28 shall be computed in accordance with the provisions contained in
sections 30 to 43D.
Rent, rates, taxes, repairs and insurance for buildings.

30. In respect of rent, rates, taxes, repairs and insurance for premises, used for the purposes of the business
or profession, the following deductions shall be allowed—
(a) where the premises are occupied by the assessee—
(i) as a tenant, the rent paid for such premises ; and further if he has undertaken to bear the
cost of repairs to the premises, the amount paid on account of such repairs ;
(ii) otherwise than as a tenant, the amount paid by him on account of current repairs to the
premises ;
(b) any sums paid on account of land revenue, local rates or municipal taxes ;
(c) the amount of any premium paid in respect of insurance against risk of damage or destruction of
the premises.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amount paid on account of the cost
of repairs referred to in sub-clause ( i), and the amount paid on account of current repairs referred to in
sub-clause ( ii), of clause ( a), shall not include any expenditure in the nature of capital expenditure.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
137 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Repairs and insurance of machinery, plant and furniture.

31. In respect of repairs and insurance of machinery, pl ant or furniture used for the purposes of the business
or profession, the following deductions shall be allowed—
(i) the amount paid on account of current repairs thereto ;
(ii) the amount of any premium paid in respect of insurance against risk of damage or destruction
thereof.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amount paid on account of current
repairs shall not include any expenditure in the nature of capital expenditure.
Depreciation.

32. (1) In respect of depreciation of—
(i) buildings, machinery, plant or furniture, being tangible assets;
(ii) know-how,  patents,  copyrights,  trade  marks,  licences,  franchises  or  any  other  business  or
commercial rights of similar nature, being intangible  assets acquired on or after the 1st day of April,
1998, not being goodw ill of a business or profession,
owned, wholly or partly, by the assessee and used for the purposes of the business or profession, the
following deductions shall be allowed—
(i) in the case of assets of an undertaking engaged in generation or generation and distribution of
power, such percentage on the actual cost thereof to the assessee as may be prescribed;
(ii) in the case of any block of assets, such percentage on the written down value thereof as may be
prescribed:
Provided  that no deduction shall be allowed under this clause in respect of—
(a) any motor car manufactured outside  India, where  such motor car is acquired by the
assessee after the 28th day of February, 1975 but before the 1st day of April, 2001, unless
it is used—
(i) in a business of running it on hire for tourists ; or
(ii) outside India in his business or profession in another country ; and
(b) any machinery or plant if the actual cost thereof is allowed as a deduction in one or more
years under an agreement entered into by the Central Government under section 42 :
Provided further that where an asset referred to in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) or clause ( iia) or the
first proviso to clause ( iia), as the case may be, is acquired by the assessee during the previous year
and is put to use for the purposes of business or profession for a period of less than one hundredand eighty days in that previous year, the deducti on under this sub-section in respect of such asset
shall be restricted to fifty per cent of the amount calculated at the percentage prescribed for an
asset under clause ( i) or clause ( ii) or clause ( iia), as the case may be :INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
138 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided also that where an asset referred to in clause ( iia)or the first proviso to clause ( iia), as
the case may be, is acquired by the assessee durin g the previous year and is put to use for the
purposes of business for a period of less than one  hundred and eighty days in that previous year,
and the deduction under this sub-section in respect of such asset is restricted to fifty per cent of the
amount calculated at the percentage prescribed for an asset under clause ( iia)for that previous
year, then, the deduction for the balance fifty per cent of the amount calculated at the percentage
prescribed  for  such  asset  under  clause  ( iia)shall  be  allowed  under  this  sub-section  in  the
immediately succeeding previous year in respect of such asset:
Provided also that where an asset being commercial vehicl e is acquired by the assessee on or after
the 1st day of October, 1998 but before the 1st day of April, 1999 and is put to use before the 1st
day of April, 1999 for the purposes of business or profession, the deduction in respect of such assetshall be allowed on such percentage on the written down value thereof as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this proviso,—
(a) the  expression  "commercial vehicle"  means "heavy  goods vehicle",  "heavy  passenger
motor vehicle", "light motor vehicle", "medium goods vehicle" and "medium passenger
motor vehicle" but does not include "maxi-cab", "motor-cab", "tractor" and "road-roller";
(b) the expressions "heavy goods vehicle", "heavy passenger motor vehicle", "light motor
vehicle",  "medium  goods  vehicle",  "medium  passenger  motor  vehicle",  "maxi-cab",
"motor-cab", "tractor" and "road roller" shall have the meanings respectively as assigned
to them in section 2 of the Motor V ehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988):
Provided also  that, in respect of the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on
the 1st day of April, 1991, the deducti on in relation to any block of assets under this clause shall, in
the case of a company, be restricted to seventy-five per cent of the amount calculated at thepercentage, on the written down value of such assets, prescribed under this Act immediately before
the commencement of the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1991:
Provided also that the aggregate deduction, in respect of depreciation of buildings, machinery,
plant or furniture, being tangible assets or know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences,
franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, being intangible  assets
allowable to the predecessor and the successor in the case of succession referred to in clause ( xiii),
clause ( xiiib) and clause ( xiv)of section 47 or section 170 or to the amalgamating company and the
amalgamated company in the case of amalgamation,  or to the demerged company and the resulting
company in the case of demerger, as the case may be, shall not exceed in any previous year thededuction calculated at  the  prescribed rates as if  the  succession  or  the  amalgamation or  the
demerger, as the case may be, had not taken pl ace, and such deduction shall be apportioned
between the predecessor and the successor, or the amalgamating company and the amalgamatedcompany, or the demerged company and the resulting company, as the case may be, in the ratio of
the number of days for which the assets were used by them.
Explanation 1. —Where the business or profession of th e assessee is carried on in a building not
owned by him but in respect of which the assessee holds a lease or other right of occupancy and
any capital expenditure is incurred by the assesse e for the purposes of the business or profession on
the  construction  of any  structure  or  doing of  any work in or  in relation to, and  by way  ofrenovation or extension of, or improvement to, the bu ilding, then, the provisions of this clause shall
apply as if the said structure or work is a building owned by the assessee.
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of this sub-section "written down value of the block of assets"
shall have the same meaning as in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 6) of section 43.
Explanation 3.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "assets" shall mean—
(a) tangible assets, being buildings, machinery, plant or furniture;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
139 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) intangible assets, being know-how, patents, copyrights, trade marks, licences, franchises or
any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, not being g oodwill of a business
or profession.
Explanation 4.— For the  purposes of this sub-section, the  expression "know-how"  means any
industrial information or technique likely to assist  in the manufacture or processing of goods or in
the  working of a  mine, oil-well or other sources of mineral deposits (including searching for
discovery or testing of deposits for the winning of access thereto).
Explanation  5.— For  the  removal of  doubts,  it  is hereby  declared  that  the  provisions of  this
sub-section  shall apply  whether  or  not  the  assessee  has claimed  the  deduction  in  respect  of
depreciation in computing his total income;
(iia) in the case of any new machinery or plant (other than ships and aircraft), which has been acquired
and  installed after  the  31st  day  of  March, 2005,  by  an assessee  engaged in  the  business of
manufacture or production of any article or thing or in the business of generation, transmission or
distribution of power, a further sum equal to twenty per cent of the actual cost of such machineryor plant shall be allowed as deduction under clause ( ii) :
Provided  that  where  an  assessee,  sets  up  an  undertaking or  enterprise  for  manufacture  or
production of any article or thing, on or after the 1st day of April, 2015 in any backward area
notified by the Central Government in this behalf, in the State of Andhra Pradesh or in the State of
Bihar or in the State of Telangana or in the Stat e of West Bengal, and acquires and installs any new
machinery or plant (other than ships and airc raft) for the purposes of the said undertaking or
enterprise during the period beginning on the 1st day of April, 2015 and ending before the 1st day
of April, 2020 in the said backward area, then, the provisions of clause ( iia)shall have effect, as if
for the words "twenty per cent", the words "thirty-five per cent" had been substituted :
Providedfurther  that no deduction shall be allowed in respect of—
(A) any machinery or plant which, before its installation by the assessee, was used either
within or outside India by any other person; or
(B) any machinery or plant installed in any office premises or any residential accommodation,
including accommodation in the nature of a guest-house; or
(C) any office appliances or road transport vehicles; or
(D) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as a deduction
(whether by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under
the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" of any one previous year;
(iii) in the case of any building, machinery, plant or furniture in respect of which depreciation is claimed
and allowed under clause ( i) and which is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed in the previous
year (other than the previous year in which it is first brought into use), the amount by which the
moneys payable in respect of such building, machinery, plant or furniture, together with the amount
of scrap value, if any, fall short of the written down value thereof :
Provided that such deficiency is actually written off in the books of the assessee.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,—
(1) "moneys payable" in respect of any building, machinery, plant or furniture includes—
(a) any insurance, salvage or compensation moneys payable in respect thereof;
(b) where the building, machinery, plant or furniture is sold, the price for which it is
sold,
so, however, that where the actual cost of a motor car is, in accordance with the proviso to
clause ( 1) of section 43, taken to be twenty-five thousand rupees, the moneys payable in
respect of such motor car shall be taken to be a sum which bears to the amount for which
the motor car is sold or, as the case may be, the amount of any insurance, salvage orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
140 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
compensation moneys payable in respect thereof (including the amount of scrap value, if
any) the same proportion as the amount of tw enty-five thousand rupees bears to the actual
cost of the motor car to the assessee as it would have been computed before applying the
said proviso;
(2) "sold" includes a transfer by way of exchange or a compulsory acquisition under any law
for the time being in force but does not include a transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of
any  asset  by  the  amalgamating  company  to  the  amalgamated  company  where  the
amalgamated company is an Indian company or in a scheme of amalgamation of a bankingcompany, as referred to in clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10
of 1949) with a banking institution as referred to in sub-section (15) of section 45 of the
said Act, sanctioned and brought into force by the Central Government under sub-section(7)  of section 45 of that  Act,  of any  asset  by  the  banking company  to the  banking
institution.
(iv) [***]
(v) [***]
(vi) [***]
(1A) [***]
(2) Where, in the assessment of the assessee, full ef fect cannot be given to any allowance under sub-section
(1) in any previous year, owing to there being no profit s or gains chargeable for that previous year, or owing
to the profits or gains chargeable being less than the allowance, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section(2) of section 72 and sub-section (3) of section 73, the allowance or the part of the allowance to which
effect  has not  been  given,  as the  case  may  be,  shall be  added  to  the  amount  of  the  allowance  for
depreciation for the following previous year and deemed to be part of that allowance, or if there is no suchallowance for that previous year, be deemed to be th e allowance for that previous year, and so on for the
succeeding previous years.
Investment allowance.

32A. (1) In respect of a ship or an aircraft or machinery or plant specified in sub- section (2), which is
owned by the assessee and is wholly used for the purposes  of the business carried on by him, there shall, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed a deduction, in respect of theprevious year in which the ship or aircraft was acquired or the machinery or plant was installed or, if the
ship, aircraft, machinery or plant is first put to us e in the immediately succeeding previous year, then, in
respect of that previous year, of a sum by way of inve stment allowance equal to twenty-five per cent of the
actual cost of the ship, aircraft, machinery or plant to the assessee :
Provided  that in respect of a ship or an aircraft or ma chinery or plant specified in sub-section (8B), this
sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "t wenty-five per cent", the words "twenty per cent" had
been substituted :
Provided further  that no deduction shall be allowed under this section in respect of—
(a) any  machinery  or  plant  installed  in  any  office  premises  or  any  residential  accommodation,
including any accommodation in the nature of a guest house ;
(b) any office appliances or road transport vehicles ;
(c) any ship, machinery or plant in respect of which the deduction by way of development rebate is
allowable under section 33 ; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
141 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(d) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as a deduction (whether
by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profitsand gains of business or profession" of any one previous year.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, "actual cost" means the actual cost of the ship, aircraft,
machinery or plant to the assessee as reduced by that  part of such cost which has been met out of the
amount released to the assessee under sub-section (6) of section 32AB.
(2) The ship or aircraft or machinery or plant referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely :—
(a) a new ship or new aircraft acquired after the 31st day of March, 1976, by an assessee engaged in
the business of operation of ships or aircraft ;
(b) any new machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of March, 1976,—
(i) for the purposes of business of generation or distribution of electricity or any other form of
power ; or
(ii) in a small-scale industrial undertaking for the purposes of business of manufacture or
production of any article or thing ; or
(iii) in  any  other  industrial  undertaking  for  the  purposes  of  business  of  construction,
manufacture or production of any article or thing, not being an article or thing specified inthe list in the Eleventh Schedule :
Provided  that nothing contained in clauses ( a) and ( b) shall apply in relation to,—
(i) a new ship or new aircraft acquired, or
(ii) any new machinery or plant installed,
after the 31st day of March, 1987 but before the 1s t day of April, 1988, unless such ship or aircraft
is acquired or such machinery or plant is installed in the circumstances specified in clause ( a) of
sub-section (8B) and the assessee furnishes evidence to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer as
specified in that clause ;
(c) any new machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of March, 1983, but before the 1st day of
April, 1987, for the purposes of business of repairs to ocean-going vessels or other powered craft if
the business is carried on by an Indian company and the business so carried on is for the time being
approved for the purposes of this clause by the Central Government.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section and sub-sections (2B), (2C) and (4),—
(1)(a) "new ship" or "new aircraft" includes a ship or aircraft which before the date of acquisition by
the assessee was used by any other person, if it was not at any time previous to the date of such
acquisition owned by any person resident in India ;
(b) "new machinery  or  plant"  includes machinery or plant  which before  its installation  by  the
assessee was used outside India by any other person, if the following conditions are fulf illed,
namely :—
(i) such machinery or plant was not, at any time previous to the date of such installation by
the assessee, used in India ;
(ii) such machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside India ; and
(iii) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such machinery or plant has been
allowed or is allowable under the provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of
1922), or this Act in computing the total income of any person for any period prior to thedate of the installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee,
(2) an  industrial  undertaking shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  small-scale  industrial  undertaking,  if  the
aggregate value of the machinery and plant (other than tools, jigs, dies and moulds) installed, as onthe last day of the previous year, for the purposes of the business of the undertaking does notINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
142 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
exceed,—
(i) in a case where the previous year ends before the 1st day of August, 1980, ten lakh rupees
;
(ii) in a case where the previous year ends after the 31st day of July, 1980, but before the 18th
day of March, 1985, twenty lakh rupees; and
(iii) in a case where the previous year ends after the 17th day of March, 1985, thirty-five lakh
rupees,
and for this purpose the value of any machinery or plant shall be,—
(a) in the case of any machinery or plant owned by the assessee, the actual cost thereof to the
assessee ; and
(b) in the case of any machinery or plant hired by  the assessee, the actual cost thereof as in
the case of the owner of such machinery or plant.
(2A) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be denied in respect of any machinery or plant installed
and used mainly for the purposes of business of cons truction, manufacture or production of any article or
thing, not being an article or thing specified in the list in the Eleventh Schedule, by reason only that such
machinery or plant is also used for the purposes of business of construction, manufacture or production of
any article or thing specified in the said list.
(2B) Where any new machinery or plant is installed after the 30th day of June, 1977, but before the 1st day
of April, 1987, for the purposes of business of manufac ture or production of any article or thing and such
article or thing—
(a) is manufactured or produced by using any technology (including any process) or other know-how
developed in, or
(b) is an article or thing invented in,
a laboratory owned or financed by the Governme nt, or a laboratory owned by a public sector
company or a University or by an institution recognised in this behalf by the prescribed authority,
the provisions of sub-section (1) shall have effect in re lation to such machinery or plant as if for the words
"twenty-five per cent", the words "thirty-five per cent" had been substituted, if the following conditions arefulfilled, namely :—
(i) the right to use such technology (including an y process) or other know-how or to manufacture or
produce such article or thing has been acquired from the owner of such laboratory or any person
deriving title from such owner ;
(ii) the  assessee  furnishes, along with his return of income  for the  assessment  year for which the
deduction is claimed, a certificate from the prescrib ed authority to the effect that such article or
thing is manufactured or produced by using such  technology (including any process) or other
know-how developed in such laboratory or is an article or thing invented in such laboratory ; and
(iii) the machinery or plant is not used for the purpos e of business of manufacture or production of any
article or thing specified in the list in the Eleventh Schedule.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "laboratory financed by the Government" means a laboratory owned by any body [including a
society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860)] and financed wholly or
mainly by the Government;
(b) [***]
(c) "University"  means a  University  established  or  incorporated  by  or  under  a  Central,  State  or
Provincial Act  and  includes an  institution  declared  under  section  3  of  the  University  Grants
Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) to be a University for the purposes of that Act.]
(2C) Where any new machinery or plant, being machiner y or plant which would assist in control of pollutionINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
143 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
or protection of environment and which has been notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the
Official Gazette, is installed after the 31st day of Ma y, 1983 but before the 1st day of April, 1987, in any
industrial undertaking referred to in sub-clause ( i) or sub-clause ( ii) or sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) o f
sub-section (2), the provisions of sub-section (1) shall have  effect in relation to such machinery or plant as if
for the words "twenty-five per cent", the words "thirty-five per cent" had been substituted.
(3) Where the total income of the assessee assessable for the assessment year relevant to the previous year
in which the ship or aircraft was acquired or the machinery or plant was installed, or, as the case may be, the
immediately succeeding previous year (the total income for this purpose being computed after deduction ofthe allowances under section 33 and section 33A, but without making any deduction under sub-section (1)
of this section or any deduction under Chapter VI-A) is nil or is less than the full amount of the investment
allowance,—
(i) the sum to be allowed by way of investment allowance for that assessment year under sub-section
(1) shall be only such amount as is sufficient to reduce the said total income to nil ; and
(ii) the  amount  of  the  investment  allowance,  to  the  extent  to  which  it  has not  been  allowed  as
aforesaid, shall be carried forward to the following assessment year, and the investment allowance
to be allowed for the following assessment year shal l be such amount as is sufficient to reduce the
total income of the assessee assessable for that assessment year, computed in the manner aforesaid,
to nil, and the balance of the investment allowance, if any, still outstanding shall be carried forward
to  the  following assessment  year  and  so  on,  so,  however,  that  no  portion  of  the  investmentallowance shall be carried forward for more than eight assessment years immediately succeeding
the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the ship or aircraft was acquired or the
machinery or plant was installed or, as the case may be, the immediately succeeding previous year.
Explanation .—Where for any assessment year, investment allowance is to be allowed in accordance with
the provisions of this sub-section in respect of any ship or aircraft acquired or any machinery or plantinstalled in more than one previous year, and the total income of the assessee assessable for that assessment
year (the total income for this purpose being computed after deduction of the allowances under section 33
and section 33A, but without making any deduction under sub-section (1) of this section or any deductionunder Chapter VI-A) is less than the aggregate of the amounts due to be allowed in respect of the assets
aforesaid for that assessment year, the following procedure shall be followed, namely :—
(a) the allowance under clause ( ii) shall be made before any allowance under clause ( i) is made; and
(b) where an allowance has to be made under clause ( ii) in respect of amounts carried forward from
more than one assessment year, the amount carried forward from an earlier assessment year shall
be allowed before any amount carried forward from a later assessment year.
(4) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed only if the following conditions are fulf illed,
namely :—
(i) the particulars prescribed in this behalf have be en furnished by the assessee in respect of the ship
or aircraft or machinery or plant;
(ii) an amount equal to seventy-five per cent of the investment allowance to be actually allowed is
debited to the profit and loss account of any previ ous year in respect of which the deduction is to
be allowed under sub-section (3) or any earlier previous year (being a previous year not earlier than
the year in which the ship or aircraft was acquired or the machinery or plant was installed or the
ship, aircraft, machinery or plant was first put to  use) and credited to a reserve account (to be
called the "Investment Allowance Reserve Account") to be ut ilised—
(a) for the purposes of acquiring, before the expiry of a period of ten years next following the
previous year in which the ship or aircraft was acquired or the machinery or plant wasinstalled, a new ship or a new aircraft or new machinery or plant [other than machinery or
plant  of  the  nature  referred  to  in  clauses ( a),  (b) an d ( d)  of  the  second  proviso  to
sub-section (1) for the purposes of the business of the undertaking; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
144 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) until the acquisition of a new ship or a new aircraft or new machinery or plant as aforesaid,
for the purposes of the business of the undertaking other than for distribution by way ofdividends or profits or for remittance outside India as profits or for the creation of any
asset outside India:
Provided  that this clause shall have effect in respect of a ship as if for the word "seventy-five", the
word "fifty" had been substituted.
Explanation .—Where the amount debited to the profit and loss account and credited to the Investment
Allowance Reserve Account under this sub-section is not less than the amount required to be so credited on
the basis of the amount of deduction in respect of investment allowance claimed in the return made by the
assessee under section 139, but a higher deduction in respect of the investment allowance is admissible onthe basis of the total income as proposed to be computed by the Assessing Officer under section 143, the
Assessing Officer shall, by notice in writing in this behalf, allow the assessee an opportunity to credit within
the time specified in the notice or within such further time as the Assessing Officer may allow, a furtheramount to the Investment Allowance Reserve Account out of the profits and gains of the previous year in
which such notice is served on the assessee or of the immediately preceding previous year, if the acc ounts
for that year have not been made up; and, if the a ssessee credits any further amount to such account within
the  time  aforesaid, the  amount  so credited shall be  deemed to have  been credited to the  Investment
Allowance Reserve Account of the previous year in which the deduction is admissible and such amount shall
not be taken into account in determining the adequacy of the reserve required to be created by the assessee
in respect of the previous year in which such further credit is made:
Provided  that such opportunity shall not be allowed by the Assessing Officer in a case where the difference
in the total income as proposed to be computed by him and the total income as returned by the assessee
arises out of the application of the proviso to sub-sectio n (1) of section 145 or sub-section (2) of that section
or the omission by the assessee to disclose his income fully and truly.
(5) Any allowance made under this section in respect of any ship, aircraft, machinery or plant shall be
deemed to have been wrongly made for the purposes of this Act—
(a) if the ship, aircraft, machinery or plant is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to any
person at any time before the expiry of eight y ears from the end of the previous year in which it
was acquired or installed; or
(b) if at any time before the expiry of ten years from  the end of the previous year in which the ship or
aircraft  was acquired or the  machinery or plant  was installed, the assessee does not  utilise  the
amount credited to the reserve account under sub-section (4) for the purposes of acquiring a newship or a new aircraft or new machinery or plant [other than machinery or plant of the nature
referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( d) of the second proviso to sub-section (1)] for the purposes of
the business of the undertaking; or
(c) if at any time before the expiry of the ten years aforesaid, the assessee utilises the am ount credited
to the reserve account under sub-section (4) for distribution by way of dividends or profits or for
remittance outside India as profits or for the creat ion of any assets outside India or for any other
purpose which is not a purpose of the business of the undertaking,
and the provisions of sub-section (4A) of section 155 shall apply accordingly:
Provided  that nothing in clause ( a) shall apply—
(i) where the ship, aircraft, machinery or plant is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to the
Government, a local authority, a corporation estab lished by a Central, State or Provincial Act or a
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or
(ii) where the sale or transfer of the ship, aircraft, machinery or plant is made in connection with the
amalgamation or succession, referred to in sub-section (6) or sub-section (7).
(6) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company sells or otherwise transfers to the
amalgamated company any ship, aircraft, machinery or plant, in respect of which investment allowance hasINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
145 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
been allowed to the amalgamating company under sub-section (1),—
(a) the amalgamated company shall continue to fulfil the conditions mentioned in sub-section (4) in
respect of the reserve created by the amalgamati ng company and in respect of the period within
which such ship, aircraft, machinery or plant shall not be sold or otherwise transferred and in
default of any of these conditions, the provisions of  sub-section (4A) of section 155 shall apply to
the amalgamated company as they would have applied to the amalgamating company had itcommitted the default; and
(b) the balance of investment allowance, if any, still outstanding to the amalgamating company in
respect of such ship, aircraft, machinery or plan t, shall be allowed to the amalgamated company in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), so, however, that the total period for which the
balance of investment allowance shall be carried forward in the assessments of the amalgamating
company and the amalgamated company shall not exceed the period of eight years specified insub-section (3) and the amalgamated company shall be treated as the assessee in respect of such
ship, aircraft, machinery or plant for the purposes of this section.
(7) Where a firm is succeeded to by a company in the business carried on by it as a result of which the firm
sells or otherwise transfers to the company any ship, aircraft, machinery or plant, the provisions of clauses
(a) and ( b) of sub-section (6) shall, so far as may be, apply to the firm and the company.
Explanation. —The provisions of this sub-section shall apply only where—
(i) all the property of the firm relating to the business immediately before the succession becomes the
property of the company;
(ii) all the liabilities of the firm relating to the business immediately before the succession become the
liabilities of the company; and
(iii) all the shareholders of the company were partners of the firm immediately before the succession.
(8) The Central Government, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that the deduction allowable under this section shall not be allowed in respect of anyship or aircraft acquired or any machinery or plant installed after such date as may be specified therein.
(8A) The Central Government, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, may, by notification in the
Official Gazette,  omit  any  article  or  thing from the  list  of  articles  or  things  specified  in  the  Eleventh
Schedule.
(8B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (8) or the notification of the Government of India in
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue ) No. GSR 870(E), dated the 12th June, 1986, issued
thereunder, the provisions of this section shall apply in respect of,—
(a)(i) a new ship or new aircraft acquired after the 31st day of March, 1987 but before the 1st day of
April, 1988, if the assessee furnishes evidence to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer that he
had, before the 12th day of June, 1986, entered into a contract for the purchase of such ship oraircraft with the builder or manufacturer or owner thereof, as the case may be;
(ii) any new machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of March, 1987 but before the 1st day
of April, 1988, if the assessee furnishes evidence to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer thatbefore the 12th day of June, 1986, he had purchased such machinery or plant or had entered into a
contract for the purchase of such machinery or plant with the manufacturer or owner of, or a dealer
in, such machinery or plant, or had, where such machinery or plant has been manufactured in anundertaking owned by the assessee, taken steps for the manufacture of such machinery or plant:
Provided  that nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall entitle the assessee to claim deduction in
respect of a ship or aircraft or machinery or plan t referred to in this clause in any previous year
except the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1989;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
146 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) a new ship or new aircraft acquired or any new machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of
March,  1988,  but  before  such  date  as  the  Central Government,  if  it  considers  necessary  orexpedient so to do, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
(8C) Subject to the provisions of clause ( ii) of sub-section (3), where a deduction has been allowed to an
assessee under sub-section (1) in any assessment year, no deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under
section 32AB in the said assessment year (hereinafter re ferred to as the initial assessment year) and a block
of  further  period  of  four  years  beginning with  the  assessment  year  immediately  succeeding the  initialassessment year.]
(9) [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1990, w .r.e.f. 1-4-1976. ]
Investment deposit account.

32AB. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this secti on, where an assessee, whose total income includes
income chargeable to tax under the head "Profits an d gains of business or profession", has, out of such
income,—
(a) deposited any amount in an account (hereafter in this section referred to as deposit account)
maintained by him with the Development Bank before  the expiry of six months from the end of the
previous year or before furnishing the return of his income, whichever is earlier; or
(b) utilised any am ount during the previous year for the purch ase of any new ship, new aircraft, new
machinery or plant, without depositing any amount in the deposit account under clause ( a),
in accordance with, and for the purposes specified in, a sc heme (hereafter in this section referred to as the
scheme) to be framed by the Central Government, or if the assessee is carrying on the business of growing
and manufacturing tea in India, to be approved in this behalf by the Tea Board, the assessee shall be alloweda deduction (such deduction being allowed before the loss, if any, brought forward from earlier years is set
off under section 72) of—
(i) a sum equal to the amount, or the aggregate of the amounts, so deposited and any amount so
utilised; or
(ii) a sum equal to twenty per cent of the profits of business or profession as computed in the accounts
of the assessee audited in accordance with sub-section (5),
whichever is less :
Provided  that where such assessee is a firm, or any association of persons or any body of individuals, the
deduction under this section shall not be allowed in the computation of the income of any partner, or as the
case may be, any member of such firm, association of persons or body of individuals:
Provided further  that no such deduction shall be allowed in  relation to the assessment year commencing on
the 1st day of April, 1991, or any subsequent assessment year.
(2) For the purposes of this section,—
(i) [***]
(ii) "new ship" or "new aircraft" includes a ship or aircraft which before the date of acquisition by the
assessee was used by any other person, if it was not at any time previous to the date of such
acquisition owned by any person resident in India;
(iii) "new machinery or plant" includes machinery or plant which before its installation by the assessee
was used outside India by any other person, if the following conditions are fulf illed, namely :—
(a) such machinery or plant was not, at any time previous to the date of such installation byINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
147 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the assessee, used in India;
(b) such machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside India; and
(c) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such machinery or plant has been
allowed or is allowable under this Act in computing the total income of any person for any
period prior to the date of the installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee;
(iv) "Tea Board" means the Tea Board established under section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953).
(3) The profits of business or profession of an assessee for the purposes of sub-section (1) shall be an
amount arrived at after deducting an amount equal to the depreciation computed in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 32 from th e amounts of profits computed in accordance with the
requirements of Parts II and III of the Schedule VI to  the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), as increased by
the aggregate of—
(i) the amount of depreciation;
(ii) the amount of income-tax paid or payable, and provision therefor;
(iii) the amount of surtax paid or payable under the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964 (7 of 1964);
(iv) the amounts carried to any reserves, by whatever name called;
(v) the amount or amounts set aside to provisions made for meeting liab ilities, other than ascertained
liabilities;
(vi) the amount by way of provision for losses of subsidiary companies; and
(vii) the amount or amounts of dividends paid or proposed,
if any debited to the profit and loss account; and as reduced by any amount or amounts withdrawn from
reserves or provisions, if such amounts are credited to the profit and loss account.
(4) No deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed in respect of any amount ut ilised for the purchase
of—
(a) any  machinery  or  plant  to  be  installed  in  any  office  premises or  residential accommodation,
including any accommodation in the nature of a guest-house;
(b) any office appliances (not being computers);
(c) any road transport vehicles;
(d) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as a deduction (whether
by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profitsand gains of business or profession" of any one previous year;
(e) any new machinery or plant to be installed in an industrial undertaking, other than a small-scale
industrial undertaking, as defined in section 80HHA, for the purposes of business of construction,manufacture or production of any article or thing specified in the list in the Eleventh Schedule.
(5) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be admissible unless the accounts of the business or
profession of the assessee for the previous year rele vant to the assessment year for which the deduction is
claimed have been audited by an accountant as defined in the Explanation  below sub-section (2) of section
288 before the specified date referred to in section 44AB and the assessee furnishes by that date the report
of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant :
Provided  that in a case where the assessee is required by or under any other law to get his accounts audited,
it shall be sufficient compliance with the provisions of this sub-section if such assessee gets the accounts of
such business or profession audited under such law and furnishes the report of the audit as required undersuch other law and a further report in the form prescribed under this sub-section.
(5A) Any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the deposit account shall not be allowed to be
withdrawn before the expiry of a period of five years from the date of deposit except for the purposes
specified in the scheme or in the circumstances specified below :—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
148 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) closure of business;
(b) death of an assessee;
(c) partition of a Hindu undivided fa mily;
(d) dissolution of a firm;
(e) liquidation of a company.
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall affect the  operation of the  provisions of sub-se ction  (5AA)  or  sub-section  (6)  in  relation  to  any
withdrawals made from the deposit account either before  or after the expiry of a period of five years from
the date of deposit.
(5AA) Where any amount, standing to the credit of th e assessee in the deposit account, is withdrawn during
any previous year by the assessee in the circumstance specified in clause ( a) or clause ( d) of sub-section
(5A), the whole of such amount shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or profession of that
previous year and shall accordingly be chargeable to income-tax as the income of that previous year, as if
the business had not closed or, as the case may be, the firm had not been dissolved.
(5B) Where any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the deposit account is ut ilised by the
assessee for the purposes of any expenditure in connection with the business or profession in accordance
with the scheme, such expenditure shall not be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the head
"Profits and gains of business or profession".
(6) Where any amount, standing to the credit of the assessee in the deposit account, released during any
previous year by the Development Bank for being utilised by the assessee for the purposes specified in the
scheme or at the closure of the account [in circumstances other than the circumstances specified in clauses
(b), (c) and ( e) of sub-section (5A)], is not utilised in accordance with, and within the time specified in, the
scheme, either wholly or in part, the whole of such amount or, as the case may be, part thereof which is not
so utilised shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or profession of that previous year and
shall accordingly be chargeable to income-tax as the income of that previous year.
(7) Where any asset acquired in accordance with the sche me is sold or otherwise transferred in any previous
year by the assessee to any person at any time before the expiry of eight years from the end of the previous
year in which it was acquired, such part of the cost of such asset as is relatable to the deductions allowed
under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the profit s and gains of business or profession of the previous
year in which the asset is sold or otherwise transferre d and shall accordingly be chargeable to income-tax as
the income of that previous year:
Provided  that nothing in this sub-section shall apply—
(i) where the asset is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to Government, a local authority, a
corporation established by or under a Central, Stat e or Provincial Act or a Government company as
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or
(ii) where the sale or transfer of the asset is made in connection with the succession of a firm by a
company in the business or profession carried on by  the firm as a result of which the firm sells or
otherwise transfers to the company any asset and the scheme continues to apply to the company inthe manner applicable to the firm.
Explanation .—The provisions of clause ( ii) of the proviso shall apply only where—
(i) all  the  properties  of  the  firm  relating  to  the  business  or  profession  immediately  before  the
succession become the properties of the company;
(ii) all the liabilities of the firm relating to the bus iness or profession immediately before the succession
become the liabilities of the company; and
(iii) all the shareholders of the company were partners of the firm immediately before the succession.
(8) The Central Government may, if it considers it ne cessary or expedient so to do, by notification in theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
149 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Official Gazette,  omit  any  article  or  thing from the  list  of  articles  or  things  specified  in  the  Eleventh
Schedule.
(9) The Central Government may, after making such inquiry  as it may think fit, direct, by notification in the
Official Gazette, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any class of assessees, with effect from
such date as it may specify in the notification.
(10) Where a deduction has been allowed to an assessee under this section in any assessment year, no
deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under sub-section (1) of section 32A in the said assessment year
(hereinafter referred to as the initial assessment year ) and a block of further period of four years beginning
with the assessment year immediately succeeding the initial assessment year.
Explanation. —In this section,—
(a) "computers" does not include calculating machines and calculating devices;
(b) "Development Bank" means—
(i) in the case of an assessee carrying on business of growing and manufacturing tea in India,
the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development established under section 3 of
the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981 (61 of 1981);
(ii) in the case of other assessees, the Industrial Development Bank of India established under
the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964) and includes such bank
or institution as may be specified in the scheme in this behalf.
Investment in new plant or machinery.

32AC. (1)Where an assessee, being a company, engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any
article or thing, acquires and installs new asset after the 31st day of March, 2013 but before the 1st day of
April, 2015 and the aggregate amount of actual cost of such new assets exceeds one hundred crore rupees,
then, there shall be allowed a deduction,—
(a) for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2014, of a sum equal to fifteen per
cent of the actual cost of new assets acquired and installed after the 31st day of March, 2013 but
before the 1st day of April, 2014, if the aggregate amount of actual cost of such new assets exceeds
one hundred crore rupees; and
(b) for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 2015, of a sum equal to fifteen per
cent of the actual cost of new assets acquired and installed after the 31st day of March, 2013 but
before the 1st day of April, 2015, as reduced by  the amount of deduction allowed, if any, under
clause ( a).
(1A) Where an assessee, being a company, engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any
article or thing, acquires and installs new assets and the amount of actual cost of such new assets acquired
during any previous year exceeds twenty-five crore rupees and such assets are installed on or before the 31st
day of March, 2017, then, there shall be allowed a deduction of a sum equal to fifteen per cent of the actualcost of such new assets for the assessment year relevant to that previous year:
Provided  that where the installation of the new assets are in a year other than the year of acquisition, the
deduction under this sub-section shall be allowed in the year in which the new assets are installed:
Provided further  that  no  deduction  under  this sub-section  shall be  allowed  for  the  assessment  year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2015 to the assessee, which is eligible to claim deduction undersub-section (1) for the said assessment year.
(1B) No deduction under sub-section (1A) shall be allowed for any assessment year commencing on or afterINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
150 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the 1st day of April, 2018.
(2) If any new asset acquired and installed by the a ssessee  is sold or otherwise  transferred, except  in
connection with the amalgamation or demerger, within a pe riod of five years from the date of its installation,
the amount of deduction allowed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) in respect of such new asset shall
be deemed to be the income of the assessee chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of business orprofession" of the previous year in which such new a sset is sold or otherwise transferred, in addition to
taxability of gains, arising on acc ount of transfer of such new asset.
(3) Where the new asset is sold or otherwise transferred in connection with the amalgamation or demerger
within a period of five years from the date of its in stallation, the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to
the amalgamated company or the resulting company, as the case may be, as they would have applied to the
amalgamating company or the demerged company.
(4) For the purposes of this section, "new asset" means any new plant or machinery (other than ship or
aircraft) but does not include—
(i) any plant or machinery which before its installation by the assessee was used either within or
outside India by any other person;
(ii) any  plant  or  machinery  installed  in  any  office  premises  or  any  residential  accommodation,
including accommodation in the nature of a guest house;
(iii) any office appliances including computers or computer software;
(iv) any vehicle; or
(v) any plant or machinery, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as deduction (whether by
way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits andgains of business or profession" of any previous year.
Investment in new plant or machinery in notified backward areas in certain States.

32AD. (1) Where an assessee, sets up an undertaking or enterprise for manufacture or production of any
article  or thing, on or after the  1st  day of April,  2015 in any backward area  notified by the  Central
Government in this behalf, in the State of Andhra Pradesh or in the State of Bihar or in the State of
Telangana or in the State of West Bengal, and acquires and installs any new asset for the purposes of the said
undertaking or enterprise during the period beginning on th e 1st day of April, 2015 and ending before the 1st
day of April, 2020 in the said backward area, then, there shall be allowed a deduction of a sum equal to
fifteen per cent of the actual cost of such new asset for the assessment year relevant to the previous year in
which such new asset is installed.
(2) If any new asset acquired and installed by the a ssessee  is sold or otherwise  transferred, except  in
connection with the amalgamation or demerger or re-organisation of business referred to in clause ( xiii)or
clause ( xiiib)or clause ( xiv)of section 47, within a period of five years from the date of its installation, the
amount of deduction allowed under sub-section (1)in respect of such new asset shall be deemed to be theincome of the assessee chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" of the
previous year in which such new asset is sold or otherwise transferred, in addition to taxability of gains,
arising on account of transfer of such new asset.
(3) Where the new asset is sold or otherwise transferred in connection with the amalgamation or demerger or
reorganisation of business referred to in clause ( xiii)or clause ( xiiib)or clause ( xiv)of section 47 within a
period of five years from the date of its installation, the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to the
amalgamated company or the resulting company or the successor referred to in clause ( xiii)or  clause
(xiiib)or clause ( xiv)of section 47, as the case may be, as they would have applied to the amalgamatingINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
151 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
company or the demerged company or the predecessor referred to in clause ( xiii)or clause ( xiiib)or clause
(xiv)of section 47.
(4) For the purposes of this section, "new asset" me ans any new plant or machinery (other than a ship or
aircraft) but does not include—
(a) any plant or machinery, which before its installation by the assessee, was used either within or
outside India by any other person;
(b) any  plant  or  machinery  installed  in  any  office  premises  or  any  residential  accommodation,
including accommodation in the nature of a guest house;
(c) any office appliances including computers or computer software;
(d) any vehicle; or
(e) any plant or machinery, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as deduction (whether by
way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits and
gains of business or profession" of any previous year.
Development rebate.

33. (1)(a) In respect of a new ship or new machinery or plant (other than office appliances or road transport
vehicles) which is owned by the assessee and is wholly  used for the purposes of the business carried on by
him, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section and of section 34, beallowed a deduction, in respect of the previous year in which the ship was acquired or the machinery or
plant  was installed or, if the  ship, machinery or pl ant  is first  put  to use  in the  immediately succeeding
previous year, then, in respect of that previous year, a sum by way of development rebate as specified inclause ( b).
(b) The sum referred to in clause ( a) shall be—
(A) in the case of a ship, forty per cent of the actual cost thereof to the assessee;
(B) in the case of machinery or plant,—
(i) where the machinery or plant is installed for the purposes of business of construction,
manufacture or production of any one or more of the articles or things specified in the listin the Fifth Schedule,—
(a) thirty-five per cent of the actual cost of the machinery or plant to the assessee,
where it is installed before the 1st day of April, 1970, and
(b) twenty-five per cent of such cost, where it is installed after the 31st day of March,
1970;
(ii) where the machinery or plant is installed after the 31st day of March, 1967, by an assessee
being an Indian company in premises used by it as a hotel and such hotel is for the time
being approved in this behalf by the Central Government,—
(a) thirty-five per cent of the actual cost of the machinery or plant to the assessee,
where it is installed before the 1st day of April, 1970, and
(b) twenty-five per cent of such cost, where it is installed after the 31st day of March,
1970;
(iii) where the machinery or plant is installed af ter the 31st day of March, 1967, being an asset
representing expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research related to the business
carried on by the assessee,—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
152 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) thirty-five per cent of the actual cost of the machinery or plant to the assessee,
where it is installed before the 1st day of April, 1970, and
(b) twenty-five per cent of such cost, where it is installed after the 31st day of March,
1970;
(iv) in any other case,—
(a) twenty per cent of the actual cost of the machinery or plant to the assessee, where
it is installed before the 1st day of April, 1970, and
(b) fifteen per cent of such cost, where it is installed after the 31st day of March,

1970.
(1A)( a) An assessee who, after the 31st day of March, 1964, acquires any ship which before the date of
acquisition by him was used by any other person shall, subject to the provisions of section 34, also be
allowed as a deduction a sum by way of development re bate at such rate or rates as may be prescribed,
provided that the following conditions are fulf illed, namely :—
(i) such ship was not previous to the date of such acquisition owned at any time by any person
resident in India;
(ii) such ship is wholly used for the purposes of the business carried on by the assessee; and
(iii) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(b) An assessee who installs any machinery or plant (other than office appliances or road transport vehicles)
which before such installation by the assessee was used  outside India by any other person shall, subject to
the provisions of section 34, also be allowed as a de duction a sum by way of development rebate at such
rate or rates as may be prescribed, provided that the following conditions are fulf illed, namely :—
(i) such machinery or plant was not used in India at any time previous to the date of such installation
by the assessee;
(ii) it is imported in India by the assessee from any country outside India;
(iii) no deduction on account of depreciation or development rebate in respect of such machinery or
plant has been allowed or is allowable under the provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11
of 1922), or this Act in computing the total income of any person for any period prior to the date of
the installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee;
(iv) such machinery or plant is wholly used for the purposes of the business carried on by the assessee;
and
(v) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(c) The development rebate under this sub-section shall be  allowed as a deduction in respect of the previous
year in which the ship was acquired or the machinery or plant was installed or, if the ship, machinery or
plant is first put to use in the immediately succeeding previous year, then, in respect of that previous year.
(2) In the case of a ship acquired or machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of December, 1957,
where the total income of the assessee assessable for the assessment year relevant to the previous year in
which the ship was acquired or the machinery or plant installed or the immediately succeeding previousyear, as the case may be (the total income for this purpose being computed without making any allowance
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) of this sect ion or sub-section (1) of section 33A or any deduction
under Chapter VI-A) is nil or is less than the full amount of the development rebate calculated at the rate
applicable thereto under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A), as the case may be,—
(i) the sum to be allowed by way of development rebate for that assessment year under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (1A) shall be only such amount as is sufficient to reduce the said total income to nil ;
andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
153 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) the amount of the development rebate, to the extent  to which it has not been allowed as aforesaid,
shall be  carried forward to the  following assessment  year, and the  development  rebate  to beallowed for the following assessment year shall be such amount as is sufficient to reduce the total
income of the assessee assessable for that assessment year, computed in the manner aforesaid, to
nil, and the balance of the development rebate, if an y, still outstanding shall be carried forward to
the following assessment year and so on, so however, that no portion of the development rebate
shall  be  carried  forward  for  more  than  eight  assessment  years  immediately  succeeding  the
assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the ship was acquired or the machinery orplant installed or the immediately succeeding previous year, as the case may be.
Explanation .—Where for any assessment year development rebate is to be allowed in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (2) in respect of ships acquired or machinery or plant installed in more than one
previous year, and the total income of the assessee assessable for that assessment year (the total income for
this purpose being computed without making any allowa nce under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) of this
section or sub-section (1) of section 33A or any deduction under Chapter VI-A) is less than the aggregate of
the amounts due to be allowed in respect of the asse ts aforesaid for that assessment year, the following
procedure shall be followed, namely :—
(i) the allowance under clause ( ii) of sub-section (2) shall be made before any allowance under clause
(i) of that sub-section is made; and
(ii) where an allowance has to be made under clause ( ii) of sub-section (2) in respect of amounts
carried forward from more than one assessment y ear, the amount carried forward from an earlier
assessment year shall be allowed before any amount carried forward from a later assessment year.
(3) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company sells or otherwise transfers to the
amalgamated company any ship, machinery or plant in respect of which development rebate has beenallowed to the amalgamating company under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A),—
(a) the amalgamated company shall continue to fulfil the conditions mentioned in sub-section (3) of
section 34 in respect of the reserve created by the amalgamating company and in respect of the
period within which such ship, machinery or plant shall not be sold or otherwise transferred and in
default of any of these conditions, the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 155 shall apply to theamalgamated company as they would have applied to the amalgamating company had it committed
the default; and
(b) the balance of development rebate, if any, still outstanding to the amalgamating company in respect
of such ship, machinery or plant shall be allowe d to the amalgamated company in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section (2), so, however, that the  total period for which the  balance  of
development rebate shall be carried forward in the assessments of the amalgamating company andthe amalgamated company shall not exceed the period of eight years specified in sub-section (2)
and the amalgamated company shall be treated as the assessee in respect of such ship, machinery
or plant for the purposes of this section and section 34.
(4) Where a firm is succeeded to by a company in the business carried on by it as a result of which the firm
sells or otherwise transfers to the company any ship, machinery or plant, the provisions of clauses ( a) and
(b) of sub-section (3) shall, so far as may be, apply to the firm and the company.
Explanation .—The provisions of this clause shall apply only where—
(i) all the property of the firm relating to the business immediately before the succession becomes the
property of the company;
(ii) all the liabilities of the firm relating to the business immediately before the succession become the
liabilities of the company; and
(iii) all the shareholders of the company were partners of the firm immediately before the succession.
(5) The Central Government, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do, may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that the deduction allowable under this section shall not be allowed in respect of aINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
154 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
ship acquired or machinery or plant installed after such  date, not being earlier than three years from the date
of such notification, as may be specified therein.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoin g provisions of this section, no deduction by way of
development rebate shall be allowed in respect of any machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of
March, 1965, in any office premises or any residential accommodation, including any accommodation in thenature of a guest-house:
Provided  that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply in the case of an assessee being an Indian
company, in respect of any machinery or plant installed by it in premises used by it as a hotel, where the
hotel is for the time being approved in this behalf by the Central Government.
Development allowance.

33A. (1) In respect of planting of tea bushes on any land in India owned by an assessee who carries on
business of growing and manufacturing tea in India, a sum by way of development allowance equivalentto—
(i) where tea bushes have been planted on any land not planted at any time with tea bushes or on any
land which had been previously abandoned, fifty per cent of the actual cost of planting; and
(ii) where  tea  bushes are  planted  in  replacement  of  tea  bushes that  have  died  or  have  become
permanently useless on any land already planted, thirty per cent of the actual cost of planting,
shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed as a deduction in the manner specified hereunder,
namely :—
(a) the amount of the development allowance shall, in the first instance, be computed with reference to
that portion of the actual cost of planting which is incurred during the previous year in which the
land is prepared for planting or replanting, as  the case may be, and in the previous year next
following, and the amount so computed shall be allo wed as a deduction in respect of such previous
year next following; and
(b) thereafter, the development allowance shall again be computed with reference to the actual cost of
planting, and if the sum so computed exceeds the amount allowed as a deduction under clause ( a),
the amount of the excess shall be allowed as a deduction in respect of the third succeeding previousyear  next  following the  previous  year  in  whic h  the  land  has  been  prepared  for  planting or
replanting, as the case may be :
Provided  that no deduction under clause ( i) shall be allowed unless the planting has commenced after the
31st day of March, 1965, and been completed before the 1st day of April, 1990 :
Provided further that no deduction shall be allowed under clause ( ii) unless the planting has commenced
after the 31st day of March, 1965, and been completed before the 1st day of April, 1970.
(2) Where the total income of the assessee assessable for the assessment year relevant to the previous year
in respect of which the deduction is required to be allowed under sub-section (1) (the total income for this
purpose being computed after deduction of the allowance under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) or
clause ( ii) of sub-section (2) of section 33, but without making any deduction under sub-section (1) of this
section or any deduction under Chapter VI-A) is nil or is less than the full amount of the development
allowance calculated at the rates and in the manner specified in sub-section (1)—
(i) the  sum  to  be  allowed  by  way  of  development  allowance  for  that  assessment  year  under
sub-section (1) shall be only such amount as is sufficient to reduce the said total income to nil ; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
155 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) the amount of the development allowance, to the extent to which it has not been allowed as
aforesaid,  shall  be  carried  forward  to  the  following  assessment  year,  and  the  developmentallowance to be allowed for the following assessment year shall be such amount as is sufficient to
reduce  the  total income  of  the  assessee  assessable  for  that  assessment  year,  computed in the
manner aforesaid, to nil, and the balance of the development allowance, if any, still outstanding
shall be carried forward to the following assessmen t year and so on, so, however, that no portion of
the  development  allowance  shall  be  carried  forward  for  more  than  eight  assessment  years
immediately succeeding the assessment year in which the deduction was first allowable.
Explanation .—Where for any assessment year development allowance is to be allowed in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section (2) in respect of more than one previous year, and the total income of theassessee  assessable  for  that  assessment  year  (the  total income  for  this  purpose  being computed  after
deduction of the allowance under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) or clause ( ii) of sub-section (2) of
section 33, but without making any deduction under sub-section (1) of this section or any deduction underChapter VI-A) is less than the amount of the development allowance due to be made in respect of that
assessment year, the following procedure shall be followed, namely :—
(i) the  allowance  under  clause  ( ii)  of  sub-section  (2)  of  this  section  shall be  made  before  any
allowance under clause ( i) of that sub-section is made; and
(ii) where an allowance has to be made under clause ( ii) of sub-section (2) of this section in respect of
amounts carried forward from more than one assessment year, the amount carried forward from an
earlier assessment year shall be allowed before any amount carried forward from a later assessment
year.
(3) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed only if the following conditions are fulf illed,
namely :—
(i) the particulars prescribed in this behalf have been furnished by the assessee;
(ii) an amount equal to seventy-five per cent of the development allowance to be actually allowed is
debited to the profit and loss account of the rele vant previous year and credited to a reserve
account to be ut ilised by the assessee during a period of eight years next following for the purposes
of the business of the undertaking, other than—
(a) for distribution by way of dividends or profits; or
(b) for remittance outside India as profits or for the creation of any asset outside India; and
(iii) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
(4) If any such land is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to any person at any time before the
expiry of eight years from the end of the previous year in which the deduction under sub-section (1) was
allowed, any allowance under this section shall be deemed to have been wrongly made for the purposes of
this Act, and the provisions of sub-section (5A) of section 155 shall apply accordingly :
Provided  that this sub-section shall not apply—
(i) where the land is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to the Government, a local authority,
a corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act, or a Government company as
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or
(ii) where the sale or transfer of the land is made in connection with the amalgamation or succession
referred to in sub-section (5) or sub-section (6).
(5) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company sells or otherwise transfers to the
amalgamated company any land in respect  of which development  allowance  has been allowed to the
amalgamating company under sub-section (1),—
(a) the amalgamated company shall continue to fulfil the conditions mentioned in sub-section (3) in
respect of the reserve created by the amalgamati ng company and in respect of the period withinINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
156 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
which such land shall not be sold or otherwise tr ansferred and in default of any of these conditions,
the provisions of sub-section (5A) of section 155  shall apply to the amalgamated company as they
would have applied to the amalgamating company had it committed the default; and
(b) the balance of development allowance, if any, still outstanding to the amalgamating company in
respect  of  such  land  shall  be  allowed  to  th e  amalgamated company in accordance  with the
provisions  of  sub-section  (2),  so,  however,  that  the  total  period  for  which  the  balance  of
development allowance shall be carried forward in  the assessments of the amalgamating company
and the amalgamated company shall not exceed the period of eight years specified in sub-section(2) and the amalgamated company shall be treated as the assessee in respect of such land for the
purposes of this section.
(6) Where a firm is succeeded to by a company in the business carried on by it as a result of which the firm
sells or otherwise transfers to the company any land on which development allowance has been allowed, the
provisions of clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-secti on (5) shal l , so far as m ay be, appl y to the fi rm and the
company.
Explanation .—The provisions of this sub-section shall apply if the conditions laid down in the Explanation
to sub-section (4) of section 33 are fulfilled.
(7) For the purposes of this section, "actual cost of planting" means the aggregate of—
(i) the cost of preparing the land;
(ii) the cost of seeds, cutting and nurseries;
(iii) the cost of planting and replanting; and
(iv) the cost of upkeep thereof for the previous year in which the land has been prepared and the three
successive previous years next following such previous year,
reduced by that portion of the cost, if any, as has been met directly or indirectly by any other person or
authority:
Provided  that where such cost exceeds—
(i) forty thousand rupees per hectare in respect of land situate in a h illy area comprised in the district
of Darjeeling; or
(ii) thirty-five thousand rupees per hectare in respect of land situate in a h illy area comprised in an area
other than the district of Darjeeling; or
(iii) thirty thousand rupees per hectare in any other area,
then, the excess shall be ignored.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this proviso, "district of Da rjeeling" means the district of Darjeeling as on
the 28th day of February, 1981, being the date of introduction of the Finance B ill, 1981, in the House of the
People.
(8) The Board may, having regard to the elevation and topography, by general or special order, declare any
areas to be hilly areas for the purposes of this sect ion and such order shall not be questioned before any
court of law or any other authority.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, an assessee having a leasehold or other right of occupancy
in any land shall be deemed to own such land and where the assessee transfers such right, he shall bedeemed to have sold or otherwise transferred such land.
Tea development account, coffee development account and rubber development account.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
157 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

33AB. (1) Where an assessee carrying on business of gr owing and manufacturing tea or coffee or rubberi n
India has, before the  expiry of six months from the  end of the  previous year or before  the  due date
offurnishing the return of his income, whichever is earlier,—
(a) deposited with the National Bank any amount or amounts in an account (hereafter in this section
referred to as the special account) maintained by the assessee with that Bank in accordance with,
and for the purposes specified in, a scheme (hereafter in this section referred to as the scheme)approved in this behalf by the Tea Board or the Coffee Board or the Rubber Board; or
(b) deposited any amount in an account (hereafter in this section referred to as the Deposit Account)
opened by the assessee in accordance with, and for the purposes specified in, a scheme framed bythe Tea Board or the Coffee Board or the Rubber Board, as the case may be (hereafter in this
section referred to as the deposit scheme), with the previous approval of the Central Government,
the assessee shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed a deduction (such deduction being
allowed before the loss, if any, brought forward from earlier years is set off under section 72) of—
(a) a sum equal to the amount or the aggregate of the amounts so deposited; or
(b) a sum equal to forty per cent of the profits of such business (computed under the head "Profits and
gains of business or profession" before making any deduction under this section),
whichever is less :
Provided  that where such assessee is a firm, or any association of persons or any body of individuals, the
deduction under this section shall not be allowed in the computation of the income of any partner, or as thecase may be, any member of such firm, association of persons or body of individuals :
Provided further  that where any deduction, in respect of any amount deposited in the special account, or in
the Depos it Account, has been allowed under this sub- section in any previous year, no deduction shall be
allowed in respect of such amount in any other previous year.
(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be admissible unless the accounts of such business of the
assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year for which the deduction is claimed have been
audited by an accountant as de fined in the Explanation  below sub-section (2) of section 288 before the
specified date referred to in section 44AB and the assesse e furnishes by that date the report of such audit in
the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant :
Provided  that in a case where the assessee is required by or under any other law to get his accounts audited,
it shall be sufficient compliance with the provisions of this sub-section if such assessee gets the accounts of
such business audited under such law and furnishes the report of the audit as required under such other lawand a further report in the form prescribed under this sub-section.
(3) Any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the special account or the Deposit Account shall not
be allowed to be withdrawn except for the purposes specified in the scheme or, as the case may be, in the
deposit scheme or in the circum stances specified below :—
(a) closure of business;
(b) death of an assessee;
(c) partition of a Hindu undivided fa mily;
(d) dissolution of a firm;
(e) liquidation of a company.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), where any amount standing to the credit of the
assessee in the special account or in the Deposit Acc ount is released during any previous year by the
National Bank or withdrawn by the assessee from the Deposit Account, and such amount is ut ilised for the
purchase of—
(a) any  machinery  or  plant  to  be  installed  in  any  office  premises or  residential accommodation,
including any accommodation in the nature of a guest-house;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
158 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) any office appliances (not being computers);
(c) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as a deduction (whether
by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits
and gains of business or profession" of any one previous year;
(d) any new machinery or plant to be installed in an industrial undertaking for the purposes of business
of construction, manufacture  or production of any article  or thing specified in the  list  in the
Eleventh Schedule,
the whole of such amount so ut ilised shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business of that previous
year and shall accordingly be chargeable to income-tax as the income of that previous year.
(5) Where any amount, standing to the credit of th e assessee in the special account or in the Deposit
Account, is with drawn during any previous year by the assessee in the circum stance specified in clause ( a)
or clause ( d) of sub-section (3), the whole of such amount shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of
business or profession of that previous year and shall accordingly be chargeable to income-tax as the income
of that previous year, as if the business had not closed or, as the case may be, the firm had not been
dissolved.
(6) Where any amount standing to the credit of the a ssessee in the special account or in the Deposit Account
is  utilised  by  the  assessee  for  the  purposes  of  any  expenditure  in  c onnection  with  such  business  in
accordance with the scheme or the depos it scheme, such expenditure shall not be allowed in computing theincome chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".
(7) Where any amount, standing to the credit of th e assessee in the special account or in the Deposit
Account, which is released during any previous year by the National Bank or which is withdrawn by the
assessee from the Deposit Account for being ut ilised by the assessee for the purposes of such business in
accordance with the scheme or the deposit scheme is not so utilised, either wholly or in part, within that
previous year, the whole of such amount or, as the case may be, part thereof which is not so ut ilised shall be
deemed to be profits and gains of business and accordingly chargeable to income-tax as the income of thatprevious year :
Provided  that this sub-section shall not apply in a case  where such amount is released during any previous
year at the closure of the account in circumstances specified in clauses ( b), (c) and ( e) of sub-section (3).
(8) Where any asset acquired in accordance with the scheme or the deposit scheme is sold or otherwise
transferred in any previous year by the assessee to any person at any time before the expiry of eight years
from the end of the previous year in which it was acquired,  such part of the cost of such asset as is relatable
to the deduction allowed under sub-section (1) shall be  deemed to be the profits and gains of business or
profession of the previous year in which the asset is  sold or otherwise transferred and shall accordingly be
chargeable to income-tax as the income of that previous year :
Provided  that nothing in this sub-section shall apply—
(i) where the asset is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to Government, a local authority, a
corporation established by or under a Central, Stat e or Provincial Act or a Government company as
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) ; or
(ii) where the sale or transfer of the asset is made in connection with the succession of a firm by a
company in the business or profession carried on by  the firm as a result of which the firm sells or
otherwise transfers to the company any asset and the scheme or the deposit scheme continues to
apply to the company in the manner applicable to the firm.
Explanation. —The provisions of clause ( ii) of the proviso shall apply only where—
(i) all  the  properties  of  the  firm  relating  to  the  business  or  profession  immediately  before  the
succession become the properties of the company ;
(ii) all the liabilities of the firm relating to the bus iness or profession immediately before the succession
become the liabilities of the company ; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
159 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iii) all the shareholders of the company were partners of the firm immediately before the succession.
(9) The Central Government, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that the deduction allowable under this section shall not be allowed after such date as
may be specified therein.
Explanation. —In this section,—
(a) "Coffee Board" means the Coffee Board constitu ted under section 4 of the Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of
1942);
(aa) "National Bank" means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development established
under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981 (61 of
1981);
(ab) "Rubber Board" means the Rubber Board constituted under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the
Rubber Act, 1947 (24 of 1947);
(b) "Tea Board" means the Tea Board established under section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953).
Site Restoration Fund.

33ABA.  (1) Where an assessee is carrying on business cons isting of the prospecting for, or extraction or
production of, petroleum or natural gas or both in India and in relation to which the Central Government has
entered into an agreement with such assessee for such business, has before the end of the previous year—
(a) deposited with the State Bank of India any amount or amounts in an account (hereafter in this
section referred to as the special account) maintained by the assessee with that Bank in accordancewith,  and  for  the  purposes specified  in,  a  scheme  (hereafter  in  this section  referred  to  as the
scheme) approved in this behalf by the Government of India in the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas; or
(b) deposited any amount in an account (hereafter in this section referred to as the Site Restoration
Account) opened by the assessee in accordance with, and for the purposes specified in, a scheme
framed by the Ministry referred to in clause ( a) (hereafter in this section referred to as the deposit
scheme),
the assessee shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed a deduction (such deduction being
allowed before the loss, if any, brought forward from earlier years is set off under section 72) of—
(i) a sum equal to the amount or the aggregate of the amounts so deposited; or
(ii) a sum equal to twenty per cent of the profits of such business (computed under the head "Profits
and gains of business or profession" before making any deduction under this section),
whichever is less :
Provided that where such assessee is a firm, or any association of persons or anybody of individuals, the
deduction under this section shall not be allowed in the computation of the income of any partner or, as the
case may be, any member of such firm, association of persons or body of individuals :
Provided further that where any deduction, in respect of any amount deposited in the special account, or in
the Site Restoration Account, has been allowed under th is sub-section in any previous year, no deduction
shall be allowed in respect of such amount in any other previous year :
Provided also that any amount credited in the special account or the Site Restoration Account by way of
interest shall be deemed to be a deposit.
(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be admissible unless the accounts of such business of theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
160 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
assessee for the previous year relevant to the assessment year for which the deduction is claimed have bee n
audited by an accountant as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288 before the
specified date referred to in section 44AB and the assesse e furnishes by that date the report of such audit in
the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant :
Provided that in a case where the assessee is required by or under any other law to get his accounts audited,
it shall be sufficient compliance with the provisions of this sub-section if such assessee gets the accounts of
such business audited under such law and furnishes the report of the audit as required under such other law
and a further report in the form prescribed under this sub-section.
(3) Any amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the special account or the Site Restoration Account
shall not be allowed to be withdrawn except for the pur poses specified in the scheme or, as the case may be,
in the deposit scheme.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), no deduction under sub-section (1) shall be
allowed in respect of any amount ut ilised for the purchase of—
(a) any  machinery  or  plant  to  be  installed  in  any  office  premises or  residential accommodation,
including any accommodation in the nature of a guest-house;
(b) any office appliances (not being computers);
(c) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is allowed as a deduction (whether
by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profitsand gains of business or profession" of any one previous year;
(d) any new machinery or plant to be installed in an industrial undertaking for the purposes of business
of construction, manufacture  or production of any article  or thing specified in the  list  in theEleventh Schedule.
(5) Where any amount standing to the credit of the asse ssee in the special account or in the Site Restoration
Account is withdrawn on closure of the account during any previous year by the assessee, the amount so
withdrawn from the account, as reduced by the amount, if any, payable to the Central Government by way
of profit or production share as provided in the agreem ent referred to in section 42, shall be deemed to be
the profits and gains of business or profession of that previous year and shall accordingly be chargeable to
income-tax as the income of that previous year.
Explanation.— Where any amount is withdrawn on closure of the account in a previous year in which the
business carried on by the assessee is no longer in exis tence, the provisions of this sub-section shall apply as
if the business is in existence in that previous year.
(6) Where any amount standing to the credit of the asse ssee in the special account or in the Site Restoration
Account is ut ilised by the assessee for the purposes of any expenditure in c onnection with such business in
accordance with the scheme or the deposit scheme, such expenditure shall not be allowed in computing theincome chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".
(7) Where any amount, standing to the credit of the assessee in the special account or in the Site Restoration
Account, which is released during any previous year by the State Bank of India or which is withdrawn by
the assessee from the Site Restoration Account for being ut ilised by the assessee for the purposes of such
business in accordance with the scheme or the deposit scheme is not so utilised, either wholly or in part,
within that previous year, the whole of such amount or, as the case may be, part thereof which is not so
utilised shall be deemed to be profits and gains of business and accordingly chargeable to income-tax as theincome of that previous year.
(8) Where any asset acquired in accordance with the scheme or the deposit scheme is sold or otherwise
transferred in any previous year by the assessee to any person at any time before the expiry of eight years
from the end of the previous year in which it was acquired,  such part of the cost of such asset as is relatable
to the deduction allowed under sub-section (1) shall be  deemed to be the profits and gains of business or
profession of the previous year in which the asset is  sold or otherwise transferred and shall accordingly be
chargeable to income-tax as the income of that previous year :INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
161 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply—
(i) where the asset is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to Government, a local authority, a
corporation established by or under a Central, Stat e or Provincial Act or a Government company as
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or
(ii) where the sale or transfer of the asset is made in connection with the succession of a firm by a
company in the business or profession carried on by  the firm as a result of which the firm sells or
otherwise transfers to the company any asset and the scheme or the deposit scheme continues to
apply to the company in the manner applicable to the firm.
Explanation.— The provisions of clause ( ii) of the proviso shall apply only where—
(i) all  the  properties  of  the  firm  relating  to  the  business  or  profession  immediately  before  the
succession become the properties of the company;
(ii) all the liabilities of the firm relating to the bus iness or profession immediately before the succession
become the liabilities of the company; and
(iii) all the shareholders of the company were partners of the firm immediately before the succession.
(9) The Central Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that the deduction allowable under this section shall not be allowed after such date as
may be specified therein.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "State Bank of India" means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act,
1955 (23 of 1955);
(b) the expression "amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the special account or the Site
Restoration Account" includes interest accrued to such accounts.]
Reserves for shipping business.

33AC.  (1) In the case of an assessee, being a Gove rnment company or a public company formed and
registered in India with the main object of carrying on  the business of operation of ships, there shall, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed a deduction of an amount not
exceeding fifty per cent of profits derived from the business of operation of ships (computed under the head
"Profits and gains of business or profession" and before making any deduction under this section), as isdebited to the profit and loss account of the previous ye ar in respect of which the deduction is to be allowed
and credited to a reserve account, to be ut ilised in the manner laid down in sub-section (2) :
Provided that where the aggregate of the amounts carried to such reserve account from time to time
exceeds twice the aggregate of the amounts of the pa id-up share capital, the general reserves and amount
credited to the share premium account of the assessee,  no allowance under this sub-section shall be made in
respect of such excess :
Provided further that for five assessment years commencing on  or after the 1st day of April, 2001 and
ending before the 1st day of April, 2006, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the
words "an amount not exceeding fifty per cent of prof its", the words "an amount not exceeding the profits"
had been substituted:
Provided also that no deduction shall be allowed under this section for any assessment year commencing on
or after the 1st day of April, 2005.
(2) The amount credited to the reserve account under sub-section (1) shall be ut ilised by the assessee before
the expiry of a period of eight years next following the previous year in which the amount was credited—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
162 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) for acquiring a new ship for the purposes of the business of the assessee ; and
(b) until the acquisition of a new ship, for the purpos es of the business of the assessee other than for
distribution by way of dividends or profits or fo r remittance outside India as profits or for the
creation of any asset outside India.
(3) Where any amount credited to the reserve account under sub-section (1),—
(a) has  been  utilised  for  any  purpose  other  than  that  referred  to  in  clause  ( a)  or  clause  ( b) o f
sub-section (2), the amount so ut ilised ; or
(b) has not been utilised for the purpose specified in clause ( a) of sub-section (2), the amount not so
utilised ; or
(c) has been utilised for the purpose of acquiring a new ship as specified in clause ( a) of sub-section
(2), but such ship is sold or otherwise transferred, other than in any scheme of demerger by the
assessee to any person at any time before the expiry of three years from the end of the previousyear in which it was acquired, the amount so ut ilised in acquiring the ship,
shall be deemed to be the profits,—
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), in the year in which the amount was so ut ilised ; or
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), in the  year immediately following the period of eight  years
specified in sub-section (2) ; or
(iii) in a case referred to in clause ( c), in the year in which the sale or transfer took place,
and shall be charged to tax accordingly.
(4) Where the ship is sold or otherwise transferred (o ther than in any scheme of demerger) after the expiry
of the period specified in clause ( c) of sub-section (3) and the sale proceeds are not utilised for the purpose
of acquiring a new ship within a period of one year fro m the end of the previous year in which such sale or
transfer took place, so much of such sale proceeds which represent the amount credited to the reserve
account and ut ilised for the purposes mentioned in clause ( c) of sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be the
profits  of  the  assessment  year  immediately  following the  previous  year  in  which  the  ship  is  sold  ortransferred.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "public company" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1
of 1956) ;
(aa) "Government company" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 617 of the Companies Act,
1956 (1 of 1956) ;
(b) "new ship" shall have the same meaning as in clause ( ii) of sub-section (2) of section 32AB.
Rehabilitation allowance.

33B.  Where the business of any industrial undertaking carried on in India is discontinued in any previous
year by reason of extensive damage to, or destructio n of, any building, machinery, plant or furniture owned
by the assessee and used for the purposes of such business as a direct result of—
(i) flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or other convulsion of nature ; or
(ii) riot or civil disturbance ; or
(iii) accidental fire or explosion ; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
163 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iv) action by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy (whether with or without a declaration
of war),
and, thereafter, at any time before the expiry of thre e years from the end of such previous year, the business
is re-established, reconstructed or revived by the assessee, he shall, in respect of the previous year in whichthe business is so re-established, reconstructed or revived, be allowed a deduction of a sum by way of
rehabilitation allowance equivalent to sixty per cent of the am ount of the deduction allowable to him under
clause ( iii) of sub-section (1) of section 32 in respect of  the  building, machinery, plant  or furniture  so
damaged or destroyed :
Provided  that  no  deduction  under  this  section  shall  be  allowed  in  relation  to  the  assessment  year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1985, or any subsequent assessment year.
Explanation. —In this section, "industrial undertaking" means any undertaking which is mainly engaged in
the business of generation or distribution of electricity or any other form of power or in the construction ofships or in the manufacture or processing of goods or in mining.
Conditions for depreciation allowance and development rebate.

34. (1) [***]
(2) [***](3)(a) The deduction referred to in section 33 shall not  be allowed unless an amount equal to seventy-five
per cent of the development rebate to be actually allowed is debited to the profit and loss account of any
previous year in respect of which the deduction is to be allowed under sub-section (2) of that section or any
earlier previous year (being a previous year not earlie r than the year in which the ship was acquired or the
machinery or plant was installed or the ship, machinery or plant was first put to use) and credited to a
reserve account to be ut ilised by the assessee during a period of eight years next following for the purposes
of the business of the undertaking, other than—
(i) for distribution by way of dividends or profits ; or
(ii) for remittance outside India as profits or for the creation of any asset outside India :
Provided  that  this clause  shall not  apply where  the  assessee  is a  company, being a  licensee  within the
meaning of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948), or where the ship has been acquired or themachinery or plant has been installed before the 1st day of January, 1958 :
Provided further  that where a ship has been acquired after th e 28th day of February, 1966, this clause shall
have effect in respect of such ship as if for the words "seventy-five", the word "fifty" had been substituted.
Explanation. —[Omitted by the Finance Act, 1990, w .r.e.f. 1-4-1962. Earlier, it was inserted by the Finance
Act, 1966, w .r.e.f. 1-4-1962. ]
(b) If any ship, machinery or plant is sold or otherwis e transferred by the assessee to any person at any time
before the expiry of eight years from the end of the prev ious year in which it was acquired or installed, any
allowance made under section 33 or under the correspondi ng provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922
(11 of 1922), in respect of that ship, machinery or plan t shall be deemed to have been wrongly made for the
purposes of this Act, and the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 155 shall apply accordingly :
Provided  that this clause shall not apply—
(i) where the ship has been acquired or the machinery or plant has been installed before the 1st day of
January, 1958 ; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
164 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) where  the  ship,  machinery  or  plant  is  sold  or  otherwise  transferred  by  the  assessee  to  the
Government, a local authority, a corporation estab lished by a Central, State or Provincial Act or a
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) ; or
(iii) where  the  sale  or  transfer  of  the  ship,  mach inery  or  plant  is  made  in  connection  with  the
amalgamation or succession, referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 33.
Restriction on unabsorbed depreciation and unabsorbed investment allowance for limited period in
case of certain domestic companies.

34A.  (1) In computing the profits and gains of the busin ess of a domestic company in relation to the previous
year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992, where effect is to be given
to the unabsorbed depreciation allowance or unabsorbed investment allowance or both in relation to anyprevious year relevant to the assessment year comme ncing on or before the 1st day of April, 1991, the
deduction shall be restricted to two-third of such allowance or allowances and the balance,—
(a) where it relates to depreciation allowance, be added to the depreciation allowance for the previous
year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1993 and be deemed to
be part of that allowance or if there is no such  allowance for that previous year, be deemed to be
the allowance for that previous year and so on for the succeeding previous years ;
(b) where it relates to investment allowance, be carried forward to the assessment year commencing on
the 1st day of April, 1993 and the balance of the investment allowance, if any, still outstanding
shall be carried forward to the following assessment year and where the period of eight years has
expired before the portion of such balance is adjusted, the said period shall be extended beyond
eight years till such time the portion of the said balance is absorbed in the profits and gains of the
business of the domestic company.
(2) For the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992, the provisions of sub-section (2) of
section 32 and sub-section (3) of section 32A shall a pply to the extent such provisions are not inconsistent
with the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply where the amount of unabsorbed depreciation allowance
or of the unabsorbed investment allowance, as the case may be, or the aggregate amount of such allowancesin the case of a domestic company is less than one lakh rupees.
(4) Nothing contained in sections 234B and 234C shall apply to any shortfall in the payment of any tax due
on the assessed tax or, as the case may be, returned income where such shortfall is on account of restricting
the amount of depreciation allowance or investment allowance under this section and the assessee has paidthe amount of shortfall before furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139.
Expenditure on scientific research.

35. (1) In respect of expenditure on scientific research, the following deductions shall be allowed—
(i) any expenditure (not being in the nature of capit al expenditure) laid out or expended on scientific
research related to the business.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
165 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Explanation. —Where  any  such  expenditure  has  been  laid  out  or  expended  before  the
commencement of the business (not being expenditure laid out or expended before the 1st day ofApril, 1973) on payment of any salary as defined in Explanation 2  below sub-section (5) of section
40A to an employee engaged in such scientific research or on the purchase of materials used in
such scientific research, the aggregate of the expenditure so laid out or expended within the threeyears immediately preceding the commencement of the business shall, to the extent it is certified
by the prescribed authority to have been laid out or expended on such scientific research, be
deemed  to  have  been  laid  out  or  expended  in  the  previous  year  in  which  the  business  iscommenced ;
(ii) an amount equal to one and one half times of any sum paid to a research association which has as
its object the undertaking of scientific research or to a university, college or other institution to beused for scientific research :
Provided that such association, university, college or other institution for the purposes of this
clause—
(A) is for  the  time  being approved,  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines,  in  the  manner  and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; and
(B) such association, university, college or other institution is specified as such, by notification
in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government :
Provided further  that where any sum is paid to such association, university, college or other
institution in a previous year relevant to the a ssessment year beginning on or after the 1st day of
April, 2021, the deduction under this clause shall be equal to the sum so paid;
(iia) any sum paid to a company to be used by it for scientific research:
Provided that such company—
(A) is registered in India,
(B) has as its main object the scientific research and development,
(C) is, for the purposes of this clause, for the t ime being approved by the prescribed authority
in the prescribed manner, and
(D) fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed;
(iii) any sum paid to a research association which has as its object the undertaking of research in social
science or statistical research or to a university, college or other institution to be used for research
in social science or statistical research :
Provided that such association, university, college or other institution for the purposes of this
clause—
(A) is for  the  time  being approved,  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines,  in  the  manner  and
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; and
(B) such association, university, college or other institution is specified as such, by notification
in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government.
Explanation. —The deduction, to which the assessee is entitled in respect of any sum paid to a
research association, university, college or other institution to which clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) or to
a company to which clause ( iia) applies, shall not be denied merely on the ground that, subsequent
to the payment of such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to the association, university,college or other institution referred to in clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) or to a company referred to in
clause ( iia) has been withdrawn;
(iv) in respect of any expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research related to the business
carried  on  by  the  assessee,  such  deduction  as  may  be  admissible  under  the  provisions  of
sub-section (2) :INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
166 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided  that the research association, university, college or other institution referred to in clause ( ii) or
clause ( iii) shall make an application in the prescribed form and manner to the Central Government for the
purpose of grant of approval, or continuance thereof, under clause ( ii) or, as the case may be, clause ( iii) :
Provided further  that the Central Government may, before granting approval under clause ( ii) or clause
(iii),  call  for  such  documents  (including audited  annual  accounts)  or  information  from  the  research
association, university, college or other institution as it thinks necessary in order to satisfy itself about the
genuineness of the activities of the research association, university, college or other institution and that
Government may also make such inquiries as it may deem necessary in this behalf :
Provided also  that any notification issued, by the Central Government under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii),
before the date on which the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2006 receives the assent of the President,
shall, at any one time, have effect for such assessmen t year or years, not exceeding three assessment years
(including an assessment year or years commencing before the date on which such notification is issued) asmay be specified in the notification:
Provided also that where an application under the first proviso is made on or after the date on which the
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2006 receives the assent of the President, every notification under clause
(ii) or clause ( iii) shall be issued or an order rejecting the application shall be passed within the period of
twelve  months  from  the  end  of  the  month  in  which  such  application  was  received  by  the  Central
Government:
Provided also that every notification under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) in respect of the research association,
university, college or other institution or under clause ( iia) in respect of the company issued on or before the
date on which this proviso has come into force, shall be deemed to have been withdrawn unless such
research association, university, college or other institution referred to in clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) or the
company referred to in clause ( iia) makes an intimation in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, to
the prescribed income-tax authority within three months from the date on which this proviso has come into
force,  and  subject  to  such  intimation  the  notification  shall be  valid  for  a  period  of  five  consecutive
assessment years beginning with the assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2022:
Provided also that any notification issued by the Central Government under clause ( ii) or clause ( iia) or
clause ( iii), after the date on which the Taxation and Ot her Laws (Relaxation and Amendment of Certain
Provisions) Bill, 2020 receives the assent of the President, shall, at any one time, have effect for such
assessment year or years, not exceeding five assessment years as may be specified in the notification.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the deduction in respect of any sum paid to the
research association, university, college or other institution referred to in clause ( ii) or clause ( iii), or the
company referred to in clause ( iia) of sub-section (1), shall not be allowed, unless such research association,
university, college or other institution or company—
(i) prepares such statement for such period as may be  prescribed and deliver or cause to be delivered
to  the  said  prescribed  income-tax  authority  or  the  person  authorised  by  such  authority  such
statement in such form, verified in such manner, setting forth such particulars and within such time,
as may be prescribed:
Provided that such research association, university, college or other institution or the company
may also deliver to the prescribed authority a co rrection statement for rectification of any mistake
or  to  add,  delete  or  update  the  information  furnished  in  the  statement  delivered  under  this
sub-section in such form and verified in such manner as may be prescribed;
(ii) furnishes to the donor, a certificate specifying the amount of donation in such manner, containing
such particulars and within such time from the date of receipt of sum, as may be prescribed.
(2) For the purposes of clause ( iv) of sub-section (1),—
(i) in a case where such capital expenditure is incurr ed before the 1st day of April, 1967, one-fifth of
the capital expenditure incurred in any previous year shall be deducted for that previous year; and
the  balance  of  the  expenditure  shall be  deducted  in  equal instalments  for  each  of  the  fourINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
167 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
immediately succeeding previous years ;
(ia) in a case where such capital expenditure is incurred after the 31st day of March, 1967, the whole
of such capital expenditure incurred in any previous year shall be deducted for that previous year :
Provided  that no deduction shall be admissible under this clause in respect of any expenditure
incurred on the acquisition of any land, whether the land is acquired as such or as part of anyproperty, after the 29th day of February, 1984.
Explanation 1 .—Where any capital expenditure has been incurred before the commencement of
the  business,  the  aggregate  of  the  expenditure  so  incurred  within  the  three  years immediatelypreceding the  commencement  of the  business shall be  deemed  to  have  been  incurred  in  the
previous year in which the business is commenced.
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) "land" includes any interest in land ; and
(b) the acquisition of any land shall be deemed to have been made by the assessee on the date
on which the instrument of transfer of such land to him has been registered under theRegistration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), or where he has taken or retained the possession of
such land or any part thereof in part performance of a contract of the nature referred to in
section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act,  1882 (4 of 1882), the date on which he has so
taken or retained possession of such land or part ;
(ii) notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( i), where an asset representing expenditure of a
capital nature incurred before the 1st day of April, 1967, ceases to be used in a previous year forscientific research related to the business and the value of the asset at the time of the cessation,
together with the aggregate of deductions already allowed under clause ( i) falls short of the said
expenditure, then—
(a) there shall be allowed a deduction for that previous year of an amount equal to such
deficiency, and
(b) no  deduction  shall  be  allowed  under  that  clause  for  that  previous  year  or  for  any
subsequent previous year ;
(iii) if the asset mentioned in clause ( ii) is sold, without having been us ed for other purposes, in the year
of cessation, the sale price shall be taken to be the value of the asset at the time of the cessation ;and if the asset is sold, without having been used for other purposes, in a previous year subsequent
to the year of cessation, and the sale price falls short of the value of the asset taken into account at
the time of cessation, an amount equal to the deficiency shall be allowed as a deduction for theprevious year in which the sale took place ;
(iv) where a deduction is allowed for any previous year under this section in respect of expenditure
represented wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction shall be  allowed under clause  ( ii) o f
sub-section (1) of section 32 for the same or any other previous year in respect of that asset ;
(v) where the asset mentioned in clause ( ii) is used in the business after it ceases to be used for
scientific research related to that business, depreciation shall be admissible under clause ( ii) of
sub-section (1) of section 32.
(2A) Where, before the 1st day of March, 1984, the assessee pays any sum (being any sum paid with a
specific direction that the sum shall not be used for the acquisition of any land or building or construction of
any building) to a scientific research association or university or college or other institution referred to in
clause ( ii) of sub-section (1) or to a public sector company to be used for scientific research undertaken
under a programme approved in this behalf by the prescr ibed authority having regard to the social, economic
and industrial needs of India, then,—
(a) there shall be allowed a deduction of a sum equal to one and one-third times the sum so paid ; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
168 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) no deduction in respect of such sum shall be allowed under clause ( ii) of sub-section (1) for the
same or any other assessment year.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, "public sector company" shall have the same meaning
as in clause ( b) of the Explanation  below sub-section (2B) of section 32A.
(2AA) Where the assessee pays any sum to a National La boratory or a University or an Indian Institute of
Technology or a specified person with a specific direction that the said sum shall be used for scientific
research undertaken under a programme approved in this behalf by the prescribed authority, then—
(a) there shall be allowed a deduction of a sum equal to one and one-half times the sum so paid ; and
(b) no deduction in respect of such sum shall be allowed under any other provision of this Act :
Provided  that the prescribed authority shall, before gr anting approval, satisfy itself about the feasib ility of
carrying out the scientific research and shall submit its report to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Director General or Director General in such form as may be prescribed:
Provided further  that where any sum is paid to such National Laboratory or university or Indian Institute of
Technology or specified person in a previous year relevant to the assessment year beginning on or after the
1st day of April, 2021, the deduction under this sub-section shall be equal to the sum so paid.
Explanation 1. —The deduction, to which the assessee is entitled in respect of any sum paid to a National
Laboratory, University, Indian Institute of Technology or a specified person for the approved programmereferred to in this sub-section, shall not be denied merely on the ground that, subsequent to the payment of
such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to,—
(a) such Laboratory, or specified person has been withdrawn; or
(b) the programme, undertaken by the National Laboratory, University, Indian Institute of Technology
or specified person, has been withdrawn.
Explanation 2 .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "National Laboratory" means a scientific laborat ory functioning at the national level under the
aegis of the Indian Council of Agricultural Res earch, the Indian Council of Medical Research, the
Council  of  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research,  the  Defence  Research  and  DevelopmentOrganisation, the Department of Electronics, the Department of Bio-Technology or the Department
of Atomic Energy and which is approved as a National Laboratory by the prescribed authority in
such manner as may be prescribed ;
(b) "University" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation  to clause ( ix) of section 47 ;
(c) "Indian Institute of Technology" shall have the same meaning as that of "Institute" in clause ( g) of
section 3 of the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 (59 of 1961);
(d) "specified person" means such person as is approved by the prescribed authority.
(2AB)( 1) Where a company engaged in the business of bio-technology or in any business of manufacture or
production of any article or thing, not being an article or thing specified in the list of the Eleventh Schedule
incurs any expenditure on scientific research (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of any land or
building) on in-house research and development fac ility as approved by the prescribed authority, then, there
shall be allowed a deduction of a sum equal to one and one-half times of the expenditure so incurred:
Provided  that where such expenditure on scientific research (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of
any land or building) on in-house research and development fac ility is incurred in a previous year relevant to
the assessment year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 2021, the deduction under this clause shall be
equal to the expenditure so incurred.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, "expenditure on scientific research", in relation to drugs and
pharmaceuticals, shall include  expenditure  incurred on clinical drug trial, obtaining approval from any
regulatory authority under any Central, State or Provincial Act and f iling an application for a patent under
the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970).INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
169 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(2) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of the expenditure mentioned in clause ( 1) under any other
provision of this Act.
(3) No company shall be entitled for deduction under clause ( 1) unless it enters into an agreement with the
prescribed authority for co-operation in such research and development facility and fulfils such c onditions
with regard to maintenance of accounts and audit thereof and furnishing of reports in such manner as maybe prescribed.
(4) The prescribed authority shall submit its report in relation to the approval of the said facility to the
Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Director General or Director General in
such form and within such time as may be prescribed.
(5) [***]
(6) No deduction shall be allowed to a company approved under sub-clause ( C) of clause ( iia) of sub-section
(1) in respect of the expenditure referred to in clause ( 1) which is incurred after the 31st day of March,

2008.
(2B)( a) Where, before the 1st day of March, 1984, an asses see has incurred any expenditure (not being in
the nature of capital expenditure incurred on the acquisition of any land or building or construction of anybuilding) on scientific research undertaken under a pr ogramme approved in this behalf by the pre scribed
authority having regard to the  social, economic  and industrial needs of India, he  shall, subject  to the
provisions of this sub-section, be allowed a deduction of a sum equal to one and one-fourth times theamount of the expenditure certified by the prescribed au thority to have been so incurred during the previous
year.
(b)  Where  a  deduction  has  been  allowed  under  clause  ( a)  for  any  previous  year  in  respect  of  any
expenditure, no deduction in respect of such expenditure shall be allowed under clause ( i) of sub-section (1)
or clause ( ia) of sub-section (2) for the same or any other previous year.
(c) Where a deduction is allowed for any previous year under this sub-section in respect of expenditure
represented wholly or partly by an asset, no deduction  shall be allowed in respect of that asset under clause
(ii) of sub-section (1) of section 32 for the same or any subsequent previous year.
(d) Any deduction made under this sub-section in respect of any expenditure on scientific research in excess
of the expenditure actually incurred shall be deemed to  have been wrongly made for the purposes of this Act
if  the  assessee  fails  to  furnish  within  one  year  of  the  period allowed by the  prescribed authority for
completion of the programme, a certificate of its comp letion obtained from that authority, and the provisions
of sub-section (5B) of section 155 shall apply accordingly.
(3) If any question arises under this section as to whether, and if so, to what extent, any activity constitutes
or constituted, or any asset is or was being used for,  scientific research, the Board shall refer the question
to—
(a) the Central Government, when such question relates to any activity under clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of
sub-section (1), and its decision shall be final;
(b) the prescribed authority, when such question relates to any activity other than the activity specified
in clause ( a), whose decision shall be final.
(4) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 32 shall apply in relation to deductions allowable under
clause ( iv) of sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to deductions allowable in respect of depreciation.
(5) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company sells or otherwise transfers to the
amalgamated company (being an Indian company) any asset representing expenditure of a capital nature onscientific research,—
(i) the amalgamating company shall not be allowed the deduction under clause ( ii) or clause (
iii) of
sub-section (2); andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
170 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the amalgamated company as they
would have  applied to the  amalgamating company if the  latter had not  so sold or otherwisetransferred the asset.
Expenditure on acquisition of patent rights or copyrights.

35A.  (1) In respect of any expenditure of a capital nature incurred after the 28th day of February, 1966 but
before the 1st day of April, 1998, on the acquisition of patent rights or copyrights (hereafter, in this section,
referred to as rights) used for the purposes of the business, there shall, subject to and in accordance with the
provisions of this section, be allowed for each of th e relevant previous years, a deduction equal to the
appropriate fraction of the amount of such expenditure.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "relevant previous years" means the fourteen previous years beginning with the previous year in
which  such  expenditure  is  incurred  or,  where  such  expenditure  is  incurred  before  thecommencement of the business, the fourteen previ ous years beginning with the previous year in
which the business commenced :
Provided  that where the rights commenced, that is to say , became effective, in any year prior to
the previous year in which expenditure on the ac quisition thereof was incurred by the asses see,
this clause shall have effect with the substitution for the reference to fourteen years of a reference
to fourteen years less the number of complete years which, when the rights are acquired by theassessee, have elapsed since the commencement thereof, and if fourteen years have elapsed as
aforesaid, of a reference to one year;
(ii) "appropriate fraction" means the fraction the numerator of which is one and the denominator of
which is the number of the relevant previous years.
(2) Where the rights come to an end without being subsequently revived or where the whole or any part of
the rights is sold and the proceeds of the sale (so far as they consist of capital sums) are not less than the cost
of acquisition thereof remaining unallowed, no deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed in respect of
the previous year in which the rights come to an end or, as the case may be, the whole or any part of the
rights is sold or in respect of any subsequent previous year.
(3) Where the rights either come to an end without being subsequently revived or are sold in their entirety
and the proceeds of the sale (so far as they consist of capital sums) are less than the cost of acquisition
thereof remaining unallowed, a deduction equal to such cost remaining unallowed or, as the case may be,such cost remaining unallowed as reduced by the proceeds of the sale, shall be allowed in respect of the
previous year in which the rights come to an end, or, as the case may be, are sold.
(4) Where the whole or any part of the rights is sold and the proceeds of the sale (so far as they consist of
capital sums) exceed the amount of the cost of acquisition thereof remaining unallowed, so much of theexcess as does not exceed the difference between the cost of acquisition of the rights and the amount of
such cost remaining unallowed shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of the business of the previous
year in which the whole or any part of the rights is sold.
Explanation. —Where the whole or any part of the rights is sold in a previous year in which the business is
no longer in existence, the provisions of this sub-section shall apply as if the business is in existence in that
previous year.
(5) Where a part of the rights is sold and sub-section (4) does not apply, the amount of the deduction to be
allowed under sub-section (1) shall be arrived at by—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
171 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) subtracting the proceeds of the sale (so far as they consist of capital sums) from the amount of the
cost of acquisition of the rights remaining unallowed; and
(b) dividing the remainder by the number of relevant  previous years which have not expired at the
beginning of the previous year during which the rights are sold.
(6) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company sells or otherwise transfers the rights
to the amalgamated company (being an Indian company),—
(i) the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) shall not apply in the case of the amalgamating company;
and
(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the amalgamated company as they
would have  applied to the  amalga-mating company if the  latter had not  so sold or otherwise
transferred the rights.
(7) Where in a scheme of demerger, the demerged company sells or otherwise transfers the rights to the
resulting company (being an Indian company),—
(i) the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) shall not apply in the case of the demerged company; and
(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the resulting company as they would
have applied to the demerged company, if the latter had not sold or otherwise transferred the rights.
Expenditure on know-how.

35AB.  (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),  where the assessee has paid in any previous year
relevant  to the  assessment  year commencing on or before  the  1st  day of April, 1998 any lump sum
consideration for acquiring any know-how for use for the purposes of his business, one-sixth of the amountso paid shall be deducted in computing the profits and gains of the business for that previous year, and the
balance amount shall be deducted in equal instalments for each of the five immediately succeeding previous
years.
(2) Where the know-how referred to in sub-section (1) is  developed in a laboratory, university or institution
referred to in sub-section (2B) of section 32A, one-thi rd of the said lump sum consideration paid in the
previous year by the assessee shall be deducted in co mputing the profits and gains of the business for that
year, and the balance amount shall be deducted in equal instalments for each of the two immediately
succeeding previous years.
(3) Where there is a transfer of an undertaking under a scheme of amalgamation or demerger and the
amalgamating or the demerged company is entitled to a deduction under this section, then, the amalgamated
company or the resulting company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to claim deduction under this sectionin respect of such undertaking to the same extent and in respect of the residual period as it would have been
allowable  to  the  amalgamating  company  or  the  demerged  company,  as  the  case  may  be,  had  such
amalgamation or demerger not taken place.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "know-how" means any industrial information or technique
likely to assist in the manufacture or processing of goods or in the working of a mine, oil well or other
sources of mineral deposits (including the searching fo r, discovery or testing of deposits or the winning of
access thereto).INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
172 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Expenditure for obtainin g right to use spectrum for telecommunication services .

35ABA.  (1) In respect of any expenditure, being in the nature of capital expenditure, incurred for acquiring
any right to use spectrum for telecommunication services either before the commencement of the businessor thereafter at any time during any previous year an d for which payment has actually been made to obtain a
right to use spectrum, there shall, subject to and in a ccordance with the provisions of this section, be allowed
for each of the relevant previous years, a deduction equal to the appropriate fraction of the amount of such
expenditure.
(2) The provisions contained in sub-sections (2) to (8) of section 35ABB, shall apply as if for the word
"licence", the word "spectrum" had been substituted.
(3) Where, in a previous year, any deduction has been  claimed and granted to the assessee under sub-section
(1), and, subsequently, there is failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section, then,—
(a) the deduction shall be deemed to have been wrongly allowed;
(b) the Assessing Officer may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, re-compute the total
income of the assessee for the said previous year and make the necessary rectification;
(c) the provisions of section 154 shall, so far as may be, apply and the period of four years specified in
sub-section (7) of that section being reckoned from the end of the previous year in which thefailure to comply with the provisions of this section takes place.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "relevant previous years" means,—
(A) i n a c a s e w h e r e th e s p e c t r u m f e e i s a c t u a lly paid  before  the  commencement  of  the
business to operate telecommunication services, the previous years beginning with the
previous year in which such business commenced;
(B) in any other case, the  previous years beginning with the  previous year in which the
spectrum fee is actually paid,
and the subsequent previous year or years during which the spectrum, for which the fee is paid,
shall be in force;
(ii) "appropriate fraction" means the fraction, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of
which is the total number of the relevant previous years;
(iii) "payment has actually been made" means the actual payment of expenditure irrespective of the
previous year in which the liability for the expenditure was incurred according to the method of
accounting regularly employed by the assessee or payable in such manner as may be prescribed.
Expenditure for obtaining licence to operate telecommunication services.

35ABB.  (1) In respect of any expenditure, being in the nature of capital expenditure, incurred for acquiring
any right to operate telecommunication services either before the commencement of the business to operate
telecommunication services or thereafter at any time during any previous year and for which payment has
actually been made to obtain a licence, there shall, subject to and in accordance with the provisions of thissection, be allowed for each of the relevant previous  years, a deduction equal to the appropriate fraction of
the amount of such expenditure.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "relevant previous years" means,—
(A) in a case where the licence fee is actually paid before the commencement of the businessINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
173 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
to operate telecommunication services, the previous years beginning with the previous
year in which such business commenced;
(B) in any other case, the previous years beginning  with the previous year in which the licence
fee is actually paid,
and the subsequent previous year or years during which the licence, for which the fee is paid, shall
be in force;
(ii) "appropriate fraction" means the fraction the numerator of which is one and the denominator of
which is the total number of the relevant previous years;
(iii) "payment has actually been made" means the actual payment of expenditure irrespective of the
previous year in which the liability for the expenditure was incurred according to the method of
accounting regularly employed by the assessee.
(2) Where the licence is transferred and the proceeds of the transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums)
are  less  than  the  expenditure  incurred  remaining unallowed,  a  deduction  equal  to  such  expenditureremaining unallowed, as reduced by the proceeds of the transfer, shall be allowed in respect of the previous
year in which the licence is transferred.
(3) Where the whole or any part of the licence is transf erred and the proceeds of the transfer (so far as they
consist of capital sums) exceed the amount of the expenditure incurred remaining unallowed, so much of theexcess as does not exceed the difference between the expenditure incurred to obtain the licence and the
amount of such expenditure remaining unallowed shall be chargeable to income-tax as profits and gains of
the business in the previous year in which the licence has been transferred.
Explanation.— Where the licence is transferred in a previous year in which the  business is no longer in
existence, the provisions of this sub-section shall apply as if the business is in existence in that previous year.
(4) Where the whole or any part of the licence is transf erred and the proceeds of the transfer (so far as they
consist of capital sums) are not less than the am ount of expenditure incurred remaining unallowed, no
deduction for such expenditure shall be allowed under sub-section (1) in respect of the previous year inwhich the licence is transferred or in respect of any subsequent previous year or years.
(5) Where a part of the licence is transferred in a previous year and sub-section (3) does not apply, the
deduction to be allowed under sub-section (1) for expe nditure incurred remaining unallowed shall be arrived
at by—
(a) subtracting the proceeds of transfer (so far as they consist of capital sums) from the expenditure
remaining unallowed; and
(b) dividing the remainder by the number of relevant  previous years which have not expired at the
beginning of the previous year during which the licence is transferred.
(6) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company sells or otherwise transfers the licence
to the amalgamated company (being an Indian company),—
(i) the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) shall not apply in the case of the amalgamating
company; and
(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the amalgamated company as they
would have applied to the amalga-mating company if the latter had not transferred the licence.
(7) Where, in a scheme of demerger, the demerged company sells or otherwise transfers the licence to the
resulting company (being an Indian company),—
(i) the provisions of sub-sections (2 ), (3) and (4) shall not apply in the case of the demerged company;
and
(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the resulting company as they would
have applied to the demerged company if the latter had not transferred the licence.
(8) Where a deduction for any previous year under sub-s ection (1) is claimed and allowed in respect of anyINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
174 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
expenditure referred to in that sub-section, no deduc tion shall be allowed under sub-section (1) of section 32
for the same previous year or any subsequent previous year.
Expenditure on eligible projects or schemes.

35AC.  (1) Where an assessee incurs any expenditure by way of payment of any sum to a public sector
company or a local authority or to an association or institution approved by the National Committee for
carrying out any eligible project or scheme, the assessee shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be
allowed a deduction of the amount of such expenditure incurred during the previous year :
Provided that a company may, for claiming the deduction under this sub-section, incur expenditure either by
way of payment of any sum as aforesaid or directly on the eligible project or scheme.
(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be allowed unless the assessee furnishes along with his
return of income a certificate—
(a) where the payment is to a public sector company or a local authority or an association or institution
referred to in sub-section (1), from such public sector company or local authority or, as the case
may be, association or institution;
(b) in any other case, from an accountant, as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of
section 288,
in such form, manner and containing such particulars (i ncluding particulars relating to the progress in the
work relating to the eligible project or scheme during the previous year) as may be prescribed.
Explanation. —The deduction, to which the assessee is entitled in respect of any sum paid to a public sector
company or a local authority or to an association or institution for carrying out the eligible project or schemereferred to in this section applies, shall not be denied merely on the ground that subsequent to the payment
of such sum by the assessee,—
(a) the approval granted to such association or institution has been withdrawn; or
(b) the notification notifying the eligible project or scheme carried out by the public sector company or
local authority or association or institution has been withdrawn.
(3) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any assessment year in respect of any
expenditure referred to in sub-section (1), deduction shall not be allowed in respect of such expenditureunder any other provision of this Act for the same or any other assessment year.
(4) Where an association or institution is approved by the National Committee under sub-section (1), and
subsequently—
(i) that the Principal Chief Commissioner of Income-tax (Exemption) or the Chief Commissioner of
Income-tax  (Exemption)  is satisfied  that  the  pr oject or the scheme is not being carried on in
accordance with all or any of the conditions subject to which approval was granted; or
(ii) such association or institution, to which approval has been granted, has not  furnished to the
Principal  Chief  Commissioner  of  Income-tax  (Exemption)  or  the  Chief  Commissioner  of
Income-tax (Exemption), after the end of each fi nancial year, a report in such form and setting
forth such particulars and within such time as may be prescribed,
the Principal Chief Commissioner of Income-tax (Exemption) or the Chief Commissioner of Income-tax
(Exemption) may, at any time, after giving a reas onable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed
withdrawal to the concerned association or institution, withdraw the approval:
Provided  that a copy of the order withdrawing the appr oval shall be forwarded by the Principal Chief
Commissioner of Income-tax (Exemption) or the Chief Commissioner of Income-tax (Exemption) to theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
175 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over the concerned association or institution.
(5) Where any project or scheme has been notified as an eligible project or scheme under clause ( b) of the
Explanation,  and subsequently—
(i) the  Principal Chief  Commissioner  of  Income-tax  (Exemption)  or  the  Chief  Commissioner  of
Income-tax  (Exemption)  is satisfied  that  the  pr oject or the scheme is not being carried on in
accordance with all or any of the conditions subject to which such project or scheme was notified;
or
(ii) a report in respect of such eligible project or scheme has not been furnished after the end of each
financial year, in such form and setting forth such particulars and within such time as may be
prescribed,
such notification may be withdrawn in the same manner in which it was issued:
Provided  that a reasonable opportunity of showing cause ag ainst the proposed withdrawal shall be given by
the Principal Chief Commissioner of Income-tax (Exemption) or the Chief Commissioner of Income-tax(Exemption) to the concerned association, institution, public sector company or local authority, as the case
may be:
Provided further that a copy of the notification by which the notification of the eligible project or scheme
is withdrawn shall be forwarded to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over the concerned association,institution, public sector company or local authority, as the case may be, carrying on such eligible project or
scheme.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, where—
(i) the  approval of the  National Committee,  granted  to  an association  or institution, is withdrawn
under sub-section (4) or the notification in respect of eligible project or scheme is withdrawn in the
case of a public sector company or local authority or an association or institution under sub-section
(5); or
(ii) a  company  has  claimed  deduction  under  the  proviso  to  sub-section  (1)  in  respect  of  any
expenditure incurred directly on the eligible proj ect or scheme and the approval for such project or
scheme  is  withdrawn  by  the  National  Committee  or  the  Principal  Chief  Commissioner  of
Income-tax (Exemption) or the Chief Commissioner of Income-tax (Exemption), as the case may
be under sub-section (5),
the  total amount  of the payment received by the  public  sector company or the local authority or the
as s oci ati on or the i ns ti tuti on, as the cas e m ay be, i n res pect of w hi ch s uch com pany or authori ty orassociation  or  institution  has furnished  a  certificate  referred  to  in  clause  ( a) of sub-section (2) or the
deduction claimed by a company under the proviso to sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the income of
such company or authority or association or institution, as the case may be, for the previous year in whichsuch approval or notification is withdrawn and tax shall be  charged on such income  at  the maximum
marginal rate in force for that year.
(7) No deduction under this section shall be allowed in respect of any assessment year commencing on or
after the 1st day of April, 2018.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "National Committee" means the Committee constituted by the Central Government, from amongst
persons of eminence in public life, in accordance with the rules made under this Act;
(b) "eligible project or scheme" means such project or scheme for promoting the social and economic
welfare of, or the uplift of, the public as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf on the recommendations of the National Committee.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
176 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Deduction in respect of expenditure on specified business .

35AD.  (1) An assessee shall, if he opts, be allowed a de duction in respect of the whole of any expenditure of
capital nature incurred, wholly and exclusively, for th e purposes of any specified business carried on by him
during the previous year in which such expenditure is incurred by him :
Provided that the expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of any specified business,
shall be allowed as deduction during the previous year in which he commences operations of his specified
business, if—
(a) the expenditure is incurred prior to the commencement of its operations; and
(b) the amount is capitalised in the books of account of the assessee on the date of commencement of
its operations.
(1A) [***]
(2) This section applies to the specified business which fulfils all the following conditions, namely :—
(i) it is not set up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence;
(ii) it is not set up by the transfer to the specified business of machinery or plant previously used for
any purpose;
(iii) where the business is of the nature referred to in sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( c) of sub-section (8),
such business,—
(a) is owned by a company formed and register ed in India under the Companies Act, 1956 (1
of 1956) or by a  consortium of such comp anies or by an authority or a  board or a
corporation established or constituted under any Central or State Act;
(b) has been approved by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board established under
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Petroleu m and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006
(19 of 2006) and notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf;
(c) has made not less than such proportion of its total pipe line capacity as specified by
regulations made by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board established under
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Petroleu m and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006
(19 of 2006) available for use on common carrier basis by any person other than the
assessee or an associated person; and
(d) fulfils any other condition as may be prescribed;
(iv) where the business is of the nature referred to in sub-clause ( xiv) of clause ( c) of sub-section (8),
such business,—
(A) is owned by a company registered in India or by a consortium of such companies or by an
authority or a board or corporation or any other body established or constituted under any
Central or State Act;
(B) entity  referred  to  in  sub-clause  ( A)  has entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  Central
Government or a State Government or a local authority or any other statutory body for
developing or operating and maintaining or developing, operating and maintaining, a new
infrastructure facility.
(3) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed in respect of the specified business for any
assessment year, no deduction shall be allowed under the provisions of section 10AA and Chapter VI-Aunder the heading "C.—Deductions in respect of certain incomes"  in relation to such specified business for
the same or any other assessment year.
(4) No deduction in respect of the expenditure referred to in sub-section (1) shall be allowed to the assessee
under any other section in any previous year or under this section in any other previous year, if thededuction has been claimed or opted by the assessee and allowed to him under this section.
(5) The provisions of this section shall apply to the specified business referred to in sub-section (2) if itINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
177 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
commences its operations,—
(a) on or after the 1st day of April, 2007, where the specified business is in the nature of laying and
operating a cross-country natural gas pipeline network for distribution, including storage fac ilities
being an integral part of such network;
(aa) on or after the 1st day of April, 2010, where the sp ecified business is in the nature of building and
operating a new hotel of two-star or above category as classified by the Central Government;
(ab) on or after the 1st day of April, 2010, where the sp ecified business is in the nature of building and
operating a new hospital with at least one hundred beds for patients;
(ac) on or after the 1st day of April, 2010, where the specified business is in the nature of developing
and building a housing project under a scheme for slum redevelopment or rehab ilitation framed by
the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be, and which is notified by the
Board in this behalf in accordance with the guidelines as may be prescribed;
(ad) on or after the 1st day of April, 2011, where the specified business is in the nature of developing
and building a  housing project  under a  scheme  for affordable  housing framed by the  Central
Government or a State Government, as the case may be, and notified by the Board in this behalf inaccordance with the guidelines as may be prescribed;
(ae) on or after the 1st day of April, 2011, in a new plant or in a newly installed capacity in an existing
plant for production of fert ilizer;
(af) on or after the 1st day of April, 2012, where the spec ified business is in the nature of setting up and
operating an inland container depot or a container freight station notified or approved under the
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);
(ag) on or after the 1st day of April, 2012, where the sp ecified business is in the nature of bee-keeping
and production of honey and beeswax;
(ah) on or after the 1st day of April, 2012, where the spec ified business is in the nature of setting up and
operating a warehousing fac ility for storage of sugar;
(ai) on or after the 1st day of April, 2014, where the specified business is in the nature of laying and
operating a slurry pipeline for the transportation of iron ore;
(aj) on or after the 1st day of April, 2014, where the spec ified business is in the nature of setting up and
operating a semi-conductor wafer fabrication manufacturing unit, and which is notified by the
Board in accordance with such guidelines as may be prescribed;
(ak) on or after the 1st day of April, 2017, where the sp ecified business is in the nature of developing or
operating and maintaining or developing, operating and maintaining, any infrastructure facility; and
(b) on or after the 1st day of April, 2009, in all other cases not fa lling under any of the above clauses.
(6) The assessee carrying on the business of the nature referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (5) shall be
allowed, in addition to deduction under sub-section (1), a further deduction in the previous year relevant tothe assessment year beginning on the 1st day of Apr il, 2010, of an amount in respect of expenditure of
capital nature incurred during any earlier previous year, if—
(a) the business referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (5) has commenced its operation at any time
during the period beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 2007 and ending on the 31st day of
March, 2009; and
(b) no deduction for such amount has been allowed or is allowable to the assessee in any earlier
previous year.
(6A)  Where  the  assessee  builds  a  hotel of  two-star  or  above  category  as  classified  by  the  Central
Government and subsequently, while continuing to own the hotel, transfers the operation thereof to another
person, the assessee shall be deemed to be carrying on the specified business referred to in sub-clause ( iv) of
clause ( c) of sub-section (8).
(7) The provisions contained in sub-section (6) of se ction 80A and the provisions of sub-sections (7) andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
178 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(10) of section 80-IA shall, so far as may be, apply to this section in respect of goods or services or assets
held for the purposes of the specified business.
(7A) Any asset in respect of which a deduction is cl aimed and allowed under this section shall be used only
for the specified business, for a period of eight years be ginning with the previous year in which such asset is
acquired or constructed.
(7B) Where any asset, in respect of which a deduction is claimed and allowed under this section, is used for
a purpose other than the specified business during the period specified in sub-section (7A), otherwise than
by way of a mode referred to in clause ( vii) of section 28, the total amount of deduction so claimed and
allowed in one or more previous years, as reduced by the amount of depreciation allowable in accordancewith the provisions of section 32, as if no deduction under this section was allowed, shall be deemed to be
the income of the assessee chargeable under the head "P rofits and gains of business or profession" of the
previous year in which the asset is so used.
(7C) Nothing contained in sub-section (7B) shall a pply to a company which has become a sick industrial
company under sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,
1985 (1 of 1986), during the period specified in sub-section (7A).
(8) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) an "associated person", in relation to the assessee, means a person,—
(i) who  participates,  directly or  indirectly, or  through  one  or  more  intermediaries in  the
management or control or capital of the assessee;
(ii) who holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying not less than twenty-six per cent of the
voting power in the capital of the assessee;
(iii) who appoints more than half of the Board of directors or members of the governing board,
or one or more executive directors or exec utive members of the governing board of the
assessee; or
(iv) who guarantees not less than ten per cent of the total borrowings of the assessee;
(b) "cold chain facility" means a chain of facilities for storage or transportation of agricultural and
forest  produce,  meat  and  meat  products,  poultry,  marine  and  dairy  products,  products  of
horticulture, floriculture and apiculture and processed food items under scientifically controlledconditions  including refrigeration  and  other  fac ilities  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  such
produce;
(ba) "infrastructure facility" means—
(i) a road including toll road, a bridge or a rail system;
(ii) a  highway  project  including housing or  other  activities being an  integral part  of  the
highway project;
(iii) a water supply project, water treatment system, irrigation project, sanitation and sewerage
system or solid waste management system;
(iv) a port, airport, inland waterway, inland port or navigational channel in the sea;
(c) "specified business" means any one or more of the following business, namely :—
(i) setting up and operating a cold chain facility;
(ii) setting up and operating a warehousing fac ility for storage of agricultural pr oduce;
(iii) laying and operating a cross-country natural gas or crude or petroleum oil pipeline network
for distribution, including storage fac ilities being an integral part of such network;
(iv) building and  operating,  anywhere  in  India,  a  hotel of  two-star  or  above  category  as
classified by the Central Government;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
179 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(v) building and operating, anywhere in India, a hospital with at least one hundred beds for
patients;
(vi) developing and building a housing project under a scheme for slum redevelopment or
rehabilitation framed by the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may
be, and notified by the Board in this behalf in accordance with the guidelines as may beprescribed;
(vii) developing and building a housing project under a scheme for affordable housing framed
by the Central Government or a State Governme nt, as the case may be, and notified by the
Board in this behalf in accordance with the guidelines as may be prescribed;
(viii) production of fert ilizer in India;
(ix) setting up and operating an inland container depot or a container freight station notified or
approved under the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);
(x) bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax;
(xi) setting up and operating a warehousing fac ility for storage of sugar;
(xii) laying and operating a slurry pipeline for the transportation of iron ore;
(xiii) setting up and operating a semi-conductor wafer fabrication manufacturing unit notified by
the Board in accordance with such guidelines as may be prescribed;
(xiv) developing or maintaining and operating or developing, maintaining and operating a new
infrastructure facility;
(d) any machinery or plant which was used outside India by any person other than the assessee shall
not be regarded as machinery or plant previously used for any purpose, if—
(i) such machinery or plant was not, at any time prior to the date of the installation by the
assessee, used in India;
(ii) such machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside India; and
(iii) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such machinery or plant has been
allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Act in computing the total income ofany person for any period prior to the date of installation of the machinery or plant by the
assessee;
(e) where in the case of a specified business, any machinery or plant or any part thereof previously
used for any purpose is transferred to the specified business and the total value of the machinery or
plant or part so transferred does not exceed twen ty per cent of the total value of the machinery or
plant used in such business, then, for the purposes of clause ( ii) of sub-section (2), the condition
specified therein shall be deemed to have been complied with;
(f) any  expenditure  of  capital nature  shall not  include  any  expenditure  in  respect  of  which  the
payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, otherwise than by an account payeecheque drawn on a bank or an account payee ba nk draft or use of electronic clearing system
through a bank account or through such other electronic mode as may be prescribed, exceeds ten
thousand rupees or any expenditure incurred on the acquisition of any land or goodwill or financialinstrument.
Export markets development allowance.

35B.  [Omitted by  the  Direct  Tax  Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, as amended by  the  Direct  Tax  Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1989, w.e.f. 1-4-1989. Original section 35B was inserted by the Finance Act, 1968, w.e.f.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
180 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
1-4-1968. ]
Agricultural development allowance.

35C.  [Omitted by  the  Direct  Tax  Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, as amended by  the  Direct  Tax  Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1989, w .e.f. 1-4-1989. Original section 35C was inserted by the Finance Act, 1968, w.e.f.1-4-1968. ]
Rural development allowance.