19. Sub. for "two and one-half" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

20. Serial No. ( v) and the entries relating thereto, omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Prior to its
omission, serial No. ( v) read as under:
"(v) Any other forest produce not being timber Two and one-half per cent."
or tendu leaves

21. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 ..

22. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-1-2025 .

23. Words "out of India" omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-7-2023.

24. Sub. for "twenty" by Act No. 8 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 1-7-2023. Earlier "twenty" was Sub. for "five" by Act
No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-7-2023.

25. Sub. for "seven" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

26. Words "and is for the purposes of education or medical treatment" omtt. by Act No. 8 of 2024,
w.r.e.f. 1-7-2023. Earlier the quoted words were Sub. for "and is for a purpose other than purchase of
overseas tour program package" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-7-2023.

27. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 8 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 1-10-2023.

28. Sub. for "is for a purpose other than purchase of overseas tour program package" by Act No. 08 of
2023, w.e.f. 1-7-2023.

29. Sub. for "is for the purposes of" by Act No. 8 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 1-10-2023.

30. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Prior to its substitution, third proviso read as under :
"Provided also  that the authorised dealer shall collect a sum equal to one half per cent of the amount
or aggregate of the amounts in excess of seven lakh rupees remitted by the buyer in a financial year, if
the amount being remitted out is a loan obtained from  any financial institution as defined in section
80E, for the purpose of pursuing any education:"

31. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 1-10-2023.

32. Sub. for "seven" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

33. Ins. by Act No. 8 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 1-7-2023.

34. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

35. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

36. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-1-2025 .

37. Sub. for "interest at the rate of one per cent per month or part thereof on the amount of such tax from
the date on which such tax was collectible to the date on which the tax was actually paid and such
interest shall be paid" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
700 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

38. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

39. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

40. Sub. for "sub-section (1) or sub-section (1C)" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

41. Sub. for "sub-section (1C) or sub-section (1H)" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

42. Sub. for "(1C), (1F) or (1H)" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
43-45.  Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
T ax collection account number.

206CA.  (1) Every person collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of section 206C, shall, within such
time as may be prescribed, apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a tax collection account
number.
(2) Where a tax collection account number has been allotted to a person, such person shall quote such
number—
(a) in all challans for the payment of any sum in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of
section 206C;
(b) in all certificates furnished under sub-section (5) of section 206C;
(c) in all the returns delivered in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (5A) or sub-section
(5B) of section 206C to any income-tax authority; and
(d) in all other documents pertaining to such transactions as may be prescribed in the interest of
revenue:
Provided  that the provisions of this section shall not apply on or after the 1st day of October, 2004.
Processing of statements of tax collected at source.

206CB.  (1) Where a statement of tax collection at source or a correction statement has been made by a
person collecting any sum (herein referred to as collector) under section 206C, such statement shall be
processed in the following manner, namely:—
(a) the sums collectible under this Chapter shall be computed after making the following adjustments,
namely:—
(i) any arithmetical error in the statement;
(ii) an incorrect claim, apparent from any information in the statement;
(b) the  interest, if any, shall be  computed on the  basis of the  sums collectible  as computed in the
statement;
(c) the fee, if any, shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of section 234E;
(d) the sum payable  by, or the amount of refund due to, the collector, shall be determined after
adjustment of the amount computed under clause ( b) and clause ( c) against any amount paid under
section 206C or section 234E and any amount paid otherwise by way of tax or interest or fee;
(e) an  intimation  shall  be  prepared  or  generated  and  sent  to  the  collector  specifying  the  sum
determined to be payable by, or the amount of refund due to, him under clause ( d); andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
701 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(f) the amount of refund due to the collector in pursuance of the determination under clause ( d) shall
be granted to the collector:
Provided that no intimation under this sub-section shall be sent after the expiry of the period of one year
from the end of the financial year in which the statement is filed.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, "an incorrect claim apparent from any information in
the statement" shall mean a claim, on the basis of an entry, in the statement—
(i) of  an  item,  which  is inconsistent  with  another  entry of the same or some  other item in such
statement;
(ii) in respect of rate of collection of tax at source , where such rate is not in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The Board may make a scheme for centralised proce ssing of statements of tax collected at source to
expeditiously determine the tax payable by, or the ref und due to, the collector, as required under sub-section
(1).
Requirement to furnish Permanent Account number by collectee.

206CC.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, any person paying any
sum or  amount,  on  which  tax  is collectible  at  s ource  under  Chapter  XVII-BB  (herein referred to as
collectee) shall furnish his Permanent Account Number to the person responsible for collecting such tax
(herein referred to as collector), failing which tax shall be collected at the higher of the following rates,namely:—
(i) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of this Act; or
(ii) at the rate of five per cent:
46[Provided that the rate of tax collection at source under this section shall not exceed twenty per cent.]
(2) No declaration under sub-section (1A) of section 206C shall be valid unless the person furnishes his
Permanent Account Number in such declaration.
(3) In case any declaration becomes invalid under sub-section (2), the collector shall collect the tax at source
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1).
(4) No certificate under sub-section (9) of section 206C  shall be granted unless the application made under
that section contains the Permanent Account Number of the applicant.
(5) The collectee shall furnish his Permanent Account Number to the collector and both shall indicate the
same in all the correspondence, b ills, vouchers and other documents which are sent to each other.
(6) Where the Permanent Account Number provided to the collector is invalid or does not belong to the
collectee, it shall be deemed that the collectee has not furnished his Permanent Account Number to the
collector and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply accordingly.
(7)  The  provisions  of  this  section  shall  not  appl y  to  a  non-resident  who  does  not  have  permanent
establishment in India.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "permanent establishment" includes a
fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
702 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

46. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-7-2023.
Special provision for collection of tax at source for non-filers of income-tax return.

206CCA.47[Omitted by the Finance Act, 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .]

47. Prior to its omission, section 206CCA, as Ins. by  Act No. 13 of 2021, w.e.f. 1-7-2021 and later on
amended by Act No. 06 of 2022, w.e.f. 1-4-2022  and Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023/1-7-2023,
read as under :
'206CCA . Special provision for collection of tax at source for non-filers of income-tax return. —(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other pr ovisions of this Act, where tax is required to be
collected at source under the provisions of Chapter XVII-BB, on any sum or amount received by aperson from a specified person, the tax shall be co llected at the higher of the following two rates,
namely:—
(i) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act; or
(ii) at the rate of five per cent:
Provided that the rate of tax collection at source under this section shall not exceed twenty per cent.
(2) If the provisions of section 206CC is applicable to a specified person, in addition to the provisions
of this section, the tax shall be collected at high er of the two rates provided in this section and in
section 206CC.
(3) For the purposes of this section "specified person" means a person who has not furnished the
return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous year immediately preceding the
financial year in which tax is required to be collected, for which the time limit for furnishing thereturn of income under sub-section (1) of section 139 has expired and the aggregate of tax deducted
at source and tax collected at source in his case is rupees fifty thousand or more in the said previous
year:
Provided that the specified person shall not include—
(i) a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India; or
(ii) a person who is not required to furnish the retu rn of income for the assessment year relevant to
the said previous year and is notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this
behalf.
Explanation .—For  the  purposes  of  this  sub-section,  the  expression  "permanent  establishment"
includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise is wholly or partly
carried on.'INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
703 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
C.—Advance payment of tax
Liability for payment of advance tax.

207. (1) Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year, in accordance with the provisions of
sections 208  to  219  (both  inclusive),  in  respect  of  the  total income  of  the  assessee  which  would  be
chargeable  to tax for the  assessment  year immediately following that  financial year, such income  being
hereafter in this Chapter referred to as "current income".
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to an individual resident in India, who—
(a) does not have any income chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession";
and
(b) is of the age of sixty years or more at any time during the previous year.
Conditions of liability to pay advance tax.

208. Advance tax shall be payable during a financial year in every case where the amount of such tax
payable by the assessee during that year, as computed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, is
ten thousand rupees or more.
Computation of advance tax.

209. (1) The amount of advance tax payable by an assessee in the financial year shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), be computed as follows, namely :—
(a) where the calculation is made by the assessee for the purposes of payment of advance tax under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (5 ) or sub-section (6) of section 210, he shall first
estimate his current income and income-tax thereon shall be calculated at the rates in force in the
financial year;
(b) where the calculation is made by the Assessing  Officer for the purpose of making an order under
sub-section (3) of section 210, the total income of the latest previous year in respect of which the
assessee  has been assessed by way of regular assessment  or the  total income  returned by the
assessee in any return of income furnished by him for any subsequent previous year, whichever ishigher, shall be taken and income-tax thereon shall be calculated at the rates in force in the
financial year;
(c) where the calculation is made by the Assessing Officer for the purpose of making an amended
order under sub-section (4) of section 210, the total income declared in the return furnished by the
assessee for the later previous year, or, as the case  may be, the total income in respect of which the
regular assessment, referred to in that sub-section has been made, shall be taken and income-taxthereon shall be calculated at the rates in force in the financial year;
(d) the income-tax calculated under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) shall, in each case, be
reduced by the amount of income-tax which would be deductible or collectible at source during theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
704 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
said financial year under any provision of this Act from any income (as computed before allowing
any deductions admissible under this Act) which has been taken into account in computing thecurrent income or, as the case may be, the total income aforesaid; and the amount of income-tax as
so reduced shall be the advance tax payable:
Provided  that for computing liability for advance tax, income-tax calculated under clause ( a) or clause ( b)
or clause ( c) shall not, in each case, be reduced by the aforesaid amount of income-tax which would be
deductible or collectible at source during the said fi nancial year under any provision of this Act from any
income, if the person responsible for deducting tax has paid or credited such income without deduction of
tax or it has been received or debited by the person responsible for collecting tax without collection of such
tax.
(2) Where the Finance Act of the relevant year provide s that, in the case of any class of assessees, net
agricultural income (as defined in that Act) shall be taken into account for the purposes of computing
advance tax, then, the net agricultural income to be taken into account in the case of any assessee fa lling in
that class, shall be—
(a) in cases where the Assessing Officer makes an order under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of
section 210,—
(i) if the total income of the latest previous year in respect of which the assessee has been
assessed by way of regular assessment forms the basis of computation of advance tax
payable by him, the net agricultural income which has been taken into account for thepurposes of charging income-tax for the assessment year relevant to that previous year; or
(ii) if the total income declared by the assessee for the later previous year referred to in
sub-section (4) of section 210 forms the basis of computation of advance tax, the netagricultural income as returned by the assessee in the return of income for the assessment
year relevant to such later previous year;
(b) in cases where the advance tax is paid by the asse ssee on the basis of his estimate of his current
income under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) of section 210,
the net agricultural income, as estimated by him, of the period which would be the previous year
for the immediately following assessment year.
(3) Where the Finance Act of the relevant year spec ifies any separate rate or rates for the purposes of
computing advance tax in the case of every Hindu undivided fa mily which has at least one member whose
total income of the previous year exceeds the maximu m amount not chargeable to income-tax in his case,
then, the Assessing Officer shall, for making an order under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 210
in the case of any such Hindu undivided fa mily, compute (subject to the provisions of section 164) the
advance tax at such rate or rates—
(a) in a case where the total income of the latest pr evious year in respect of which the Hindu undivided
family has been assessed by way of regular assessment forms the basis of computation of advance
tax, if the total income of any member of the family for the assessment year relevant to such latest
previous year exceeds the maximum amount not chargeable to income-tax in his case;
(b) in a case where the total income of the previous year in respect of which a return of income is
furnished by the  Hindu undivided fa mily  under section 139 or in response  to a  notice  under
sub-section (1) of section 142 forms the basis of computation of advance tax, if the total income ofany member of the  family for the  assessment  year relevant  to such previous year exceeds the
maximum amount not chargeable to income-tax in his case.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
705 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Computation and pa yment of advance tax b y assessee .

209A.  [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. Original section was
inserted by the Finance Act, 1978, w.e.f. 1-6-1978. ]
Payment of advance tax by the assessee of his ow n accord or in pursuance of order of Assessing
Officer.

210. (1) Every person who is liable to pay advance tax under section 208 (whether or not he has been
previously assessed by way of regular assessment) shall,  of his own accord, pay, on or before each of the
due dates specified in section 211, the appropriate percentage, specified in that section, of the advance tax
on his current income, calculated in the manner laid down in section 209.
(2) A person who pays any instalment or instalments of advance tax under sub-section (1), may increase or
reduce the amount of advance tax payable in the remaining instalment or instalments to accord with hisestimate of his current income and the advance tax payable thereon, and make payment of the said amount
in the remaining instalment or instalments accordingly.
(3) In the case of a person who has been already a ssessed by way of regular assessment in respect of the
total income of any previous year, the Assessing Officer, if  he is of opinion that such person is liable to pay
advance tax, may, at any time during the financial year but not later than the last day of February, by order
in writing, require such person to pay advance tax calculated in the manner laid down in section 209, and
issue to such person a notice of demand under section 156 specifying the instalment or instalments in whichsuch tax is to be paid.
(4) If, after the making of an order by the Assessing Officer under sub-section (3) and at any time before the
1st day of March, a return of income is furnished by the assessee under section 139 or in response to a
notice under sub-section (1) of section 142, or a regular assessment of the assessee is made in respect of a
previous year later than that referred to in sub-section (3), the Assessing Officer may make an amended
order and issue to such assessee a notice of demand under section 156 requiring the assessee to pay, on or
before the due date or each of the due dates specified  in section 211 falling after the date of the amended
order, the appropriate percentage, specified in section 211, of the advance tax computed on the basis of the
total income declared in such return or in respect of which the regular assessment aforesaid has been made.
(5) A person who is served with an order of the Asse ssing Officer under sub-section (3) or an amended order
under sub-section (4) may, if in his estimation the a dvance tax payable on his current income would be less
than the amount of the advance tax specified in such order or amended order, send an intimation in the
prescribed form to the Assessing Officer to that ef fect and pay such advance tax as accords wi th hi s
estimate, calculated in the manner laid down in sectio n 209, at the appropriate percentage thereof specified
in section 211, on or before the due date or each of  the due dates specified in section 211 falling after the
date of such intimation.
(6) A person who is served with an order of the Assessing Officer under sub-section (3) or amended order
under sub-section (4) shall, if in his estimation the advance tax payable on his current income would exceed
the amount of advance tax specified in such order or  amended order or intimated by him under sub-section
(5), pay on or before the due date of the last instalment specified in section 211, the appropriate part or, as
the case may be, the whole of such higher amount of advance tax as accords with his estimate, calculated inthe manner laid down in section 209.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
706 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Instalments of advance tax and due dates .

211. (1) Advance tax on the current income calculated in the manner laid down in section 209 shall be
payable by—
(a) all the assessees, other than the assessee referred to in clause ( b), who are liable to pay the same, in
four instalments during each financial year and the due date of each instalment and the amount ofsuch instalment shall be as specified in the Table below:
TABLE
Due date of
instalmentAmount payable
On or before the 15th
JuneNot less than fifteen per cent of such advance tax.
On or before the 15th
SeptemberNot less than forty-five per cent of such advance tax, as reduced by the amount, if
any, paid in the earlier instalment.
On or before the 15th
DecemberNot less than seventy-five per cent of such advance tax, as reduced by the amount
or amounts, if any, paid in the earlier instalment or instalments.
On or before the 15th
MarchThe whole amount of such advance tax, as reduced by the amount or amounts, if
any, paid in the earlier instalment or instalments;
(b) an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 44AD or sub-section (1) of section 44ADA, as the case may be, to the extent of the whole
amount of such advance tax during each financial year on or before the 15th March:
Provided  that any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before the 31st day of March shall also be
treated as advance tax paid during the financial year ending on that day for all the purposes of this Act.
(2) If the notice of demand issued under section 156 in  pursuance of an order of the Assessing Officer under
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 210 is served after any of the due dates specified in sub-section(1), the appropriate part or, as the case may be, the whole of the amount of the advance tax specified in such
notice shall be payable on or before each of such of those dates as fall after the date of service of the notice
of demand.
Estimate by assessee.

212. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Commission receipts.

213. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
707 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Interest pa yable b y Government .

214. (1) The Central Government shall pay simple interest at fifteen per cent per annum on the amount by
which the aggregate sum of any instalments of advance tax paid during any financial year in which they are
payable under sections 207 to 213 exceeds the amount of the assessed tax from the 1st day of April next
following the said financial year to the date of th e regular assessment for the assessment year immediately
following the said financial year, and where any such inst alment is paid after the expiry of the financial year,
during which it is payable by reason of the provisions of section 213, interest as aforesaid shall also be
payable on that instalment from the date of its payment to the date of regular assessment :
Provided  that in respect of any amount refunded on a provisional assessment under section 141A, no
interest shall be paid for any period after the date of such provisional assessment.
(1A) Where as a result of an order under section 147 or section 154 or section 155 or section 250 or section
254 or section 260 or section 262 or section 263 or section 264 or an order of the Settlement Commission
under sub-section (4) of section 245D, the amount on which interest was payable under sub-section (1) has
been increased or reduced, as the case may be, the interest shall be increased or reduced accordingly, and ina case where the interest is reduced, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee, a notice of demand in
the prescribed form specifying the amount of the excess interest payable and requiring him to pay such
amount ; and such notice of demand shall be deemed to be a notice under section 156 and the provisions ofthis Act shall apply accordingly.
(2) On any portion of such amount which is refunded unde r this Chapter, interest shall be payable only up to
the date on which the refund was made.
(3) This section and sections 215, 216 and 217 shall not  apply in respect  of any assessment  for the
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989, or any subsequent assessment year and, in theapplication of the said sections to the assessment for any earlier assessment year, references therein [except
in sub-section (1A) and sub-section (3) of section 215] to the other provisions of this Act shall be construed
as references to those provisions as for the time being in force and applicable to the relevant assessmentyear.
Explanation 1. —In this section, "assessed tax" shall have the same meaning as in sub-section (5) of section

215.
Explanation 2. —Where, in relation to an assessment year, an assessment is made for the first time under
section 147, the assessment so made shall be regard ed as a regular assessment for the purposes of this
section.
Interest payable by assessee.

215. (1) Where, in any financial year, an assessee has paid advance tax under section 209A or section 212
on the basis of his own estimate (including revised estimate), and the advance tax so paid is less than
seventy-five per cent of the assessed tax, simple interest at the rate of fifteen per cent per annum from the
1st day of April next following the said financial year up to the date of the regular assessment shall bepayable by the assessee upon the amount by which the advance tax so paid falls short of the assessed tax:
Provided  that in the case of an assessee, being a company, the provisions of this sub-section shall have
effect as if for the words "seventy-five per cent", th e words "eighty-three and one-third per cent" had been
substituted.
(2) Where before the date of completion of a regular assessment, tax is paid by the assessee under section
140A or otherwise,—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
708 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(i) interest shall be calculated in ac cordance with the foregoing provision up to the date on which the
tax is so paid ; and
(ii) thereafter, interest shall be calculated at the rate aforesaid on the amount by which the tax as so
paid (in so far as it relates to income subject to advance tax) falls short of the assessed tax.
(3) Where as a result of an order under section 147 or section 154 or section 155 or section 250 or section
254 or section 260 or section 262 or section 263 or section 264 or an order of the Settlement Commission
under sub-section (4) of section 245D, the amount on which interest was payable under sub-section (1) hasbeen increased or reduced, as the case may be, the interest shall be increased or reduced accordingly, and—
(i) in a case where the interest is increased, the Asse ssing Officer shall serve on the assessee, a notice
of demand in the prescribed form specifying th e sum payable, and such notice of demand shall be
deemed to be a notice under section 156 and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly;
(ii) in a case where the interest is reduced, the excess interest paid, if any, shall be refunded.
(4) In such cases and under such circumstances as may be prescribed, the Assessing Officer may reduce or
waive the interest payable by the assessee under this section.
(5) In this section and sections 217 and 273, "assessed tax" means the tax determined on the basis of the
regular assessment (reduced by the amount of tax deductible in accordance with the provisions of sections
192 to 194, section 194A, section 194C, section 194D, section 195 and section 196A so far as such tax
relates to income subject to advance tax and so far as it is not due to variations in the rates of tax made bythe Finance Act enacted for the year for which the regular assessment is made.
(6) Where, in relation to an assessment year, an asse ssment is made for the first time under section 147, the
assessment so made shall be regarded as a regular a ssessment for the purposes of this section and sections
216, 217 and 273.
Interest payable by assessee in case of under-estimate, etc.

216. Where, on making the regular assessment, the Assessing Officer finds that any assessee has—
(a) under section 209A or section 212 under-estimated the advance tax payable by him and thereby
reduced the amount payable in either of the first two instalments; or
(b) under section 213 wrongly deferred the payment of advance tax on a part of his income ;
he may direct that the assessee shall pay simple interest at fifteen per cent per annum—
(i) in the case referred to in clause ( a), for the period during which the payment was deficient, on the
difference between the amount paid in each such instalment and the amount which should have
been paid, having regard to the aggregate advance tax actually paid during the year; and
(ii) in the case referred to in clause ( b), for the period during which the payment of advance tax was so
deferred.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, any instalment due before the expiry of six months from the
commencement of the previous year in respect of which it is to be paid shall be deemed to have become due
fifteen days after the expiry of the said six months.
Interest payable by assessee when no estimate made.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
709 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

217. (1) Where, on making the regular assessment, the Assessing Officer finds—
(a) that any such person as is referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of section 209A has not sent
the statement referred to in that clause or the estimate in lieu of such statement referred to insub-section (2) of that section; or
(b) that any such person as is referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 209A has not sent
the estimate referred to in that clause,
simple interest at the rate of fifteen per cent per annum  from the 1st day of April next following the financial
year in which the advance tax was payable in accordance  with the said sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) up
to the date of the regular assessment shall be payable by the assessee upon the amount equal to the assessed
tax as defined in sub-section (5) of section 215.
(1A) Where, on making the regular assessment, the Assessing Officer finds that any person who is required
to send an estimate under sub-section (4) of section 209A or any such person as is referred to in sub-section
(3A) of section 212 has not sent the estimate referred to therein, simple interest at the rate of fifteen per cent
per annum from the 1st day of April next following th e financial year in which the advance tax was payable
in accordance with the said sub-section (4) or, as the case may be, sub-section (3A) up to the date of the
regular assessment shall be payable by the assessee upon the amount by which the advance tax paid by him
falls short of the assessed tax as defined in sub-section (5) of section 215.
(2) The provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 215 shall apply to interest payable under this
section as they apply to interest payable under that section.
When assessee deemed to be in default.

218. If any assessee does not pay on the date specified in sub-section (1) of section 211, any instalment of
the advance tax that he is required to pay by an order of the Assessing Officer under sub-section (3) orsub-section (4) of section 210 and does not, on or befo re the date on which any such instalment as is not
paid becomes due, send to the Assessing Officer an intimation under sub-section (5) of section 210 or does
not pay on the basis of his estimate of his current income the advance tax payable by him under sub-section
(6) of section 210, he  shall be  deemed to be  an assessee  in default  in respect  of such instalment  or
instalments.
Credit for advance tax.

219. Any sum, other than a penalty or interest, paid by or recovered from an assessee as advance tax in
pursuance of this Chapter shall be treated as a payment of tax in respect of the income of the period which
would be the previous year for an assessment for the assessment year next following the financial year in
which it was payable, and credit therefor shall be given to the assessee in the regular assessment.
D.—Collection and recoveryINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
710 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
When tax pa yable and when assessee deemed in default .

220. (1) Any amount, otherwise than by way of advance tax, specified as payable in a notice of demand
under section 156 shall be paid within thirty days of the service of the notice at the place and to the person
mentioned in the notice :
Provided  that, where the Assessing Officer has any reason to believe that it will be detrimental to revenue if
the  full period  of  thirty  days  aforesaid  is  allowe d,  he  may,  with  the  previous  approval of  the  Joint
Commissioner, direct that the sum specified in the notice of demand shall be paid within such period being aperiod less than the period of thirty days aforesaid, as may be specified by him in the notice of demand.
(1A) Where any notice of demand has been served upon an assessee and any appeal or other proceeding, as
the case may be, is filed or initiated in respect of the amount specified in the said notice of demand, then,
such demand shall be deemed to be valid till the dis posal of the appeal by the last appellate authority or
disposal of the proceedings, as the case may be, and any such notice of demand shall have the effect as
specified in section 3 of the Taxation Laws (Continuation and V alidation of Recovery Proceedings) Act,
1964 (11 of 1964).
(2) If the amount specified in any notice of demand under section 156 is not paid within the period limited
under sub-section (1), the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at one per cent for every month or
part of a month comprised in the period commencing from the day immediately following the end of the
period mentioned in sub-section (1) and ending with the day on which the amount is paid:
Provided  that, where as a result of an order under section 154, or section 155, or section 250, or section
254, or section 260, or section 262, or section 264 or an order of the  Settlement  Co mmission under
sub-section (4) of section 245D, the amount on whic h interest was payable under this section had been
reduced, the interest shall be reduced accordingly and the excess interest paid, if any, shall be refunded :
Provided further that where as a result of an order under sections specified in the first proviso, the amount
on which interest was payable under this section had been reduced and subsequently as a result of an order
under said sections or section 263, the amount on which interest was payable under this section is increased,
the assessee shall be liable to pay interest under sub-section (2) from the day immediately following the end
of the period mentioned in the first notice of demand, referred to in sub-section (1) and ending with the day
on which the amount is paid:
Provided also  that in respect of any period commencing on or before the 31st day of March, 1989 and
ending after that date, such interest shall, in respect of so much of such period as falls after that date, becalculated at the rate of one and one-half per cent for every month or part of a month.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner may reduce or waive the amount of interest paid
or payable by an assessee under the said sub-section if he is satisfied that—
(i) payment of such amount has caused or would cause genuine hardship to the assessee ;
(ii) default in the payment of the amount on which interest has been paid or was payable under the said
sub-section was due to circumstances beyond the control of the assessee ; and
(iii) the assessee has co-operated in any inquiry relati ng to the assessment or any proceeding for the
recovery of any amount due from him:
Provided  that the order accepting or rejecting the application of the assessee, either in full or in part, shall
be passed within a period of twelve months from the end of the month in which the application is received:
Provided further  that no order rejecting the application, either  in full or in part, shall be passed unless the
assessee has been given an opportunity of being heard:
Provided also  that where any application is pending as on the 1st day of June, 2016, the order shall be
passed on or before the 31st day of May, 2017.
(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), where interest is charged under sub-section
(1A) of section 201 on the amount of tax specified in the intimation issued under sub-section (1) of sectionINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
711 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
200A for any period, then, no interest shall be charged under sub-section (2) on the same amount for the
same period.
(2C) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), where interest is charged under sub-section (7)
of section 206C on the amount of tax specified in th e intimation issued under sub-section (1) of section
206CB for any period, then, no interest shall be char ged under sub-section (2) on the same amount for the
same period.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), on an application made by the assessee
before the expiry of the due date under sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer may extend the time for
payment or allow payment by instalments, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose in the
circumstances of the case.
(4) If the amount is not paid within the time limited under sub-section (1) or extended under sub-section (3),
as the case may be, at the place and to the person mentioned in the said notice the assessee shall be deemed
to be in default.
(5) If, in a case where payment by instalments is allowed under sub-section (3), the assessee co mmits
defaults in paying any one of the instalments within the time fixed under that sub-section, the assessee shall
be deemed to be in default as to the whole of the amount then outstanding, and the other instalment or
instalments shall be deemed to have been due on the same date as the instalment actually in default.
(6) Where an assessee has presented an appeal under section 246 or section 246A the Assessing Officer
may, in his discretion and subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose in the circumstances of
the case, treat the assessee as not being in default in  respect of the amount in dispute in the appeal, even
though the time for payment has expired, as long as such appeal remains undisposed of.
(7) Where an assessee has been assessed in respect of income arising outside India in a country the laws of
which prohibit or restrict the remittance of money to I ndia, the Assessing Officer shall not treat the assessee
as in default in respect of that part of the tax which is due in respect of that amount of his income which, by
reason of such prohibition or restriction, cannot be  brought into India, and shall continue  to treat theassessee as not in default in respect of such part of the tax until the prohibition or restriction is removed.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, income shall be  deemed to have been brought into India if it
has been utilised or could have been utilised for the purposes of any expenditure actually incurred by the
assessee outside India or if the income, whether capitalised or not, has been brought into India in any form.
Penalty payable when tax in default.

221. (1) When an assessee is in default or is deemed to be  in default in making a payment of tax, he shall, in
addition to the amount of the arrears and the amount of interest payable under sub-section (2) of section
220, be liable, by way of penalty, to pay such amount as the Assessing Officer may direct, and in the case of
a continuing default, such further amount or amounts as the Assessing Officer may, from time to time, direct,
so, however, that the total amount of penalty does not exceed the amount of tax in arrears :
Provided  that before levying any such penalty, the assessee shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard :
Provided further  that where the assessee proves to the satisfact ion of the Assessing Officer that the default
was for good and sufficient reasons, no penalty shall be levied under this section.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that an assessee shall not cease to be liable to
any penalty under this sub-section merely by reason of th e fact that before the levy of such penalty he has
paid the tax.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
712 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(2) Where as a result of any final order the amount of tax, with respect to the default in the payment of
which the penalty was levied, has been wholly reduce d, the penalty levied shall be cancelled and the amount
of penalty paid shall be refunded.
Certificate to T ax Recovery Officer.

222. (1) When an assessee is in default or is deemed to  be in default in making a payment of tax, the Tax
Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a st atement in the prescribed form specifying the amount
of arrears due from the assessee (such statement being hereafter in this Chapter and in the Second Schedulereferred to as "certificate") and shall proceed to recover from such assessee the amount specified in the
certificate by one or more of the modes mentioned be low, in accordance with the rules laid down in the
Second Schedule—
(a) attachment and sale of the assessee's movable property;
(b) attachment and sale of the assessee's immovable property;
(c) arrest of the assessee and his detention in prison;
(d) appointing a receiver for the management of the assessee's movable and immovable properties.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, the assessee's movable or immovable property shall
include any property which has been transferred, directly  or indirectly on or after the 1st day of June, 1973,
by the assessee to his spouse or minor child or son's wife or son's minor child, otherwise than for adequate
consideration, and which is held by, or stands in the na me of, any of the persons aforesaid; and so far as the
movable or immovable property so transferred to his mi nor child or his son's minor child is concerned, it
shall, even after the date of attainment of majority by  such minor child or son's minor child, as the case may
be, continue to be included in the assessee's movable or immovable property for recovering any arrears due
from the assessee in respect of any period prior to such date.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer may take action under sub-section (1), notwithstanding that proceedings for
recovery of the arrears by any other mode have been taken.
T ax Recovery Officer by whom recovery is to be effected.

223. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer competent to take action under section 222 shall be—
(a) the  Tax  Recovery  Officer  within  whose  jurisdiction  the  assessee  carries  on  his  business  or
profession or within whose jurisdiction the principal place of his business or profession is situate, or
(b) the  Tax  Recovery  Officer  within  whose  jurisdiction  the  assessee  resides  or  any  movable  or
immovable property of the assessee is situate,
the jurisdiction for this purpose being the jurisdiction  assigned to the Tax Recovery Officer under the orders
or directions issued by the  Board, or by the  Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner who is authorised in this behalf by the Board in pursuance of
section 120.
(2) Where an assessee has property within the jurisdicti on of more than one Tax Recovery Officer and the
Tax Recovery Officer by whom the certificate is drawn up—
(a) is not able to recover the entire amount by sale of the property, movable or immovable, within hisINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
713 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
jurisdiction, or
(b) is of the opinion that, for the purpose of expediti ng or securing the recovery of the whole or any
part of the amount under this Chapter, it is necessary so to do,
he may send the certificate or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of the certificate
certified in the prescribed manner and specifying th e amount to be recovered to a Tax Recovery Officer
within whose jurisdiction the assessee resides or has property and, thereupon, that Tax Recovery Officer
shall also proceed to recover the amount under this Chapter as if the certificate or copy thereof had beendrawn up by him.
Validity of certificate and cancellation or amendment thereof.

224. It shall not be open to the assessee to dispute the correctness of any certificate drawn up by the Tax
Recovery Officer on any ground whatsoever, but it shall be lawful for the Tax Recovery Officer to cancel
the certificate if, for any reason, he thinks it necessary so to do, or to correct any clerical or arithmetical
mistake therein.
Stay of proceedings in pursuance of certificate and amendment or cancellation thereof.

225. (1) It shall be lawful for the Tax Recovery Office r to grant time for the payment of any tax and when
he does so, he shall stay the proceedings for the recovery of such tax until the expiry of the time so granted.
(2) Where the order giving rise to a demand of tax fo r which a certificate has been drawn up is modified in
appeal or other proceeding under this Act, and, as a consequence thereof, the demand is reduced but the
order is the subject-matter of further proceeding under this Act, the Tax Recovery Officer shall stay the
recovery of such part of the amount specified in the certificate as pertains to the said reduction for theperiod for which the appeal or other proceeding remains pending.
(3) Where a certificate has been drawn up and subs equently the amount of the outstanding demand is
reduced as a result of an appeal or other proceeding under this Act, the Tax Recovery Officer shall, when
the order which was the subject-matter of such appeal or other proceeding has become final and conclusive,amend the certificate, or cancel it, as the case may be.
Other modes of recovery.

226. (1) Where no certificate has been drawn up under section 222, the Assessing Officer may recover the
tax by any one or more of the modes provided in this section.
(1A) Where a certificate has been drawn up under section 222, the Tax Recovery Officer may, without
prejudice to the modes of recovery specified in that section, recover the tax by any one or more of the
modes provided in this section.
(2) If any assessee is in receipt of any income charg eable under the head "Salaries", the Assessing Officer or
Tax Recovery Officer may require any person paying the same to deduct from any payment subsequent toINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
714 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the date of such requisition any arrears of tax due from such assessee, and such person shall comply with
any such requisition and shall pay the sum so deducted to the credit of the Central Government or as the
Board directs :
Provided  that any part of the salary exempt from attachment in execution of a decree of a civil court under
section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5  of 1908), shall be exempt from any requisition made
under this sub-section.
(3) (i) The Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer may,  at any time or from time to time, by notice in
writing require any person from whom money is due or  may become due to the assessee or any person who
holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of the assessee to pay to the Assessing Officer orTax Recovery Officer either forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held or at or within the time
specified in the notice (not being before the money be comes due or is held) so much of the money as is
sufficient to pay the amount due by the assessee in resp ect of arrears or the whole of the money when it is
equal to or less than that amount.
(ii) A notice under this sub-section may be issued to any person who holds or may subsequently hold any
money for  or  on account  of  the  assessee  jointly with any other  person and for  the  purposes of  this
sub-section, the shares of the joint holders in such a ccount shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to
be equal.
(iii) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the assessee at his last address known to the Assessing
Officer or Tax Recovery Officer, and in the case of  a joint account to all the joint holders at their last
addresses known to the Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer.
(iv) Save as otherwise provided in this sub-section, every person to whom a notice is issued under this
sub-section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular, where any such notice is issued to
a post office, banking company or an insurer, it shal l not be necessary for any pass book, deposit receipt,
policy or any other document to be produced for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being
made before payment is made, notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.
(v) Any claim respecting any property in relation to which a notice under this sub-section has been issued
arising after the date of the notice shall be void as against any demand contained in the notice.
(vi) Where a person to whom a notice under this sub-sectio n is sent objects to it by a statement on oath that
the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the assessee or that he does not hold any money for oron account of the assessee, then nothing contained in this sub-section shall be deemed to require such person
to pay any such sum or part thereof, as the case may be , but if it is discovered that such statement was false
in any material particular, such person shall be personally liable to the Assessing Officer or Tax RecoveryOfficer to the extent of his own liability to the assessee on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the
assessee's liability for any sum due under this Act, whichever is less.
(vii) The Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer may, at any time or from time to time, amend or revoke
any notice issued under this sub-section or extend th e time for making any payment in pursuance of such
notice.
(viii) The Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer shall grant a receipt for any amount paid in compliance
with a notice issued under this sub-section, and the person so paying shall be fully discharged from his
liability to the assessee to the extent of the am ount so paid.
(ix) Any person discharging any liability to the assessee after receipt of a notice under this sub-section shall
be personally liable to the Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer to the extent of his own liability to the
assessee so discharged or to the extent of the assessee's liability for any sum due under this Act, whichever is
less.
(x) If the person to whom a notice under this sub-section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance thereof
to the Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer, he sh all be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect
of the amount specified in the notice and further proceedings may be taken against him for the realisation of
the amount as if it were an arrear of tax due from h im, in the manner provided in sections 222 to 225 and theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
715 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
notice shall have the same effect as an attachment of a debt by the Tax Recovery Officer in exercise of his
powers under section 222.
(4) The Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer may apply to the court in whose custody there is money
belonging to the assessee for payment to him of the entire amount of such money, or, if it is more than the
tax due, an amount sufficient to discharge the tax.
(5)  The  Assessing  Officer  or  Tax  Recovery  Officer  may,  if  so  authorised  by  the  Principal  Chief
Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner by general or special
order, recover any arrears of tax due from an assessee by distraint and sale of his movable property in the
manner laid down in the Third Schedule.
Recovery through State Government.

227. If the recovery of tax in any area has been entrusted to a State Government under clause ( 1) of article
258 of the Constitution, the State Government may direct, with respect to that area or any part thereof; thattax shall be recovered therein with, and as an addition to, any municipal tax or local rate, by the same person
and in the same manner as the municipal tax or local rate is recovered.
Recovery of Indian tax in Pakistan and Pakistan tax in India.

228. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1989. ]
Recovery of tax in pursuance of agreements with foreign countries.

228A.  (1) Where an agreement is entered into by the Central Government with the Government of any
country outside India for recovery of income-tax unde r this Act and the corresponding law in force in that
country and the Government of that country or any authority under that Government which is specified in
this behalf in such agreement sends to the Board a certificate for the recovery of any tax due under such
corresponding law from a resident, or a person having any property in India, the Board may forward such
certificate to any Tax Recovery Officer having jurisdiction over the resident, or within whose jurisdiction
such property is situated and thereupon such Tax Recovery Officer shall—
(a) proceed to recover the amount specified in the cert ificate in the manner in which he would proceed
to recover the amount specified in a certificate drawn up by him under section 222; and
(b) remit any sum so recovered by him to the Board after deducting his expenses in connection with
the recovery proceedings.
(2) Where an assessee is in default or is deemed to be in default in making a payment of tax, the Tax
Recovery Officer may, if the assessee is a resident of a country (being a country with which the Central
Government  has  entered  into  an  agreement  for  the  recovery  of  income-tax  under  this  Act  and  thecorresponding law in force in that country), or has any property in that country, forward to the Board a
certificate drawn up by him under section 222 and the Board may take such action thereon as it may deemINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
716 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
appropriate having regard to the terms of the agreement with such country.
Recovery of penalties, fine, interest and other sums.

229. Any sum imposed by way of interest, fine, penalt y, or any other sum payable under the provisions of
this Act, shall be recoverable in the manner provided in this Chapter for the recovery of arrears of tax.
T ax clearance certificate.

230. (1) Subject to such exceptions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify in this behalf, no person,—
(a) who is not domiciled in India;
(b) who has come to India in connection with business, profession or employment; and
(c) who has income derived from any source in India,
shall leave  the  territory of India  by land, sea  or air unless he  furnishes to such authority as may be
prescribed—
(i) an undertaking in the prescribed form from his employer; or
(ii) through whom such person is in receipt of the income,
to the effect that tax payable by such person who is  not domiciled in India shall be paid by the employer
referred to in clause ( i) or the person referred to in clause ( ii), and the prescribed authority shall, on receipt
of the undertaking, immediately give to such person a no objection certificate, for leaving India:
Provided  that nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to a person who is not domiciled in India but
visits India  as a  foreign  tourist  or  for  any  other  purpose  not  connected  with  business,  profession  oremployment.
(1A) Subject to such exceptions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify in this behalf, every person, who is domiciled in India at the time of his departure from India, shall
furnish, in the prescribed form to the income-tax authority or such other authority as may be prescribed—
(a) the permanent account number allotted to him under section 139A:
Provided  that in case no such permanent account number has been allotted to him, or his total
income is not chargeable to income-tax or he is not required to obtain a permanent account number
under this Act, such person shall furnish a certificate in the prescribed form;
(b) the purpose of his visit outside India;
(c) the estimated period of his stay outside India:
Provided  that no person—
(i) who is domiciled in India at the time of his departure; and
(ii) in respect of whom circumstances exist which, in the opinion of an income-tax authority render it
necessary for such person to obtain a certificate under this section,
shall leave the territory of India by land, sea or ai r unless he obtains a certificate from the income-tax
authority stating that he has no liabilities under this Act, or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957), or theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
717 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Gift-tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958), or the Expenditure-tax Act, 1987 (35 of 1987), 48[or the Black Money
(Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 (22 of 2015),] or that satisfactoryarrangements have been made for the payment of all or any of such taxes which are or may become payable
by that person :
Provided  that no income-tax authority shall make it necessary for any person who is domiciled in India to
obtain a certificate under this section unless he records the reasons therefor and obtains the prior approval ofthe Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner of Income-tax.
(2) If the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft carrying persons from any place in the territory of India
to any place outside India allows any person to whom sub-section (1) or the first proviso to sub-section (1A)
applies to travel by such ship or aircraft without first satisfying himself that such person is in possession of acertificate as required by that sub-section, he shall be personally liable to pay the whole or any part of the
amount  of  tax,  if  any,  payable  by  such  person  as  the  Assessing Officer  may,  having regard  to  the
circumstances of the case, determine.
(3) In respect of any sum payable by the owner or charterer of any ship or aircraft under sub-section (2), the
owner or charterer, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be an assessee in default for such sum, and such
sum shall be recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were an arrear of tax.
(4) The Board may make rules for regulating any matter necessary for, or incidental to, the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this section.
Explanation. —For  the  purposes of  this  section,  the  expressions "owner"  and  "charterer"  include  any
representative, agent or employee empowered by the owner or charterer to allow persons to travel by the
ship or aircraft.

48. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Restrictions on registration of transfers of immovable property in certain cases.

230A.  [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2001, w.e.f. 1-6-2001 .]
Faceless collection and recovery of tax.

231. (1) The Central Government may make a scheme, by notification in  the  Official Gazette,  for  the
purposes of issuance of certificate for deduction of income-tax at any lower rates or no deduction of
income-tax under section 197, or deeming a person to  be an assessee in default under sub-section (1) of
section 201 or sub-section (6A) of section 206C, issuance of certificate for lower collection of tax under
sub-section (9) of section 206C or passing of order or amended order under sub-section (3) or sub-section(4) of section 210, or reduction or waiver of the amount of interest paid or payable by an assessee under
sub-section (2A), or extending the time for payment or allowing payment by instalment under sub-section
(3), or treating the assessee as not being in default unde r sub-section (6) or sub-section (7) of section 220, orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
718 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
levy of penalty under section 221, or drawing of cert ificate by the Tax Recovery Officer under section 222,
or jurisdiction of Tax Recovery Officer under section 223,  or stay of proceedings in pursuance of certificate
and amendment or cancellation thereof by the Tax Recovery Officer under section 225, or other modes of
recovery under section 226 or issuance of tax clearance  certificate under section 230 so as to impart greater
efficiency, transparency and accountab ility by—
(a) eliminating the interface between the income-tax authority and the assessee or any other person to
the extent technologically feasible;
(b) optimising utilisation of the resources through ec onomies of scale and functional specialisation;
(c) introducing a team-based issuance of certificate for deduction or collection of income-tax at lower
rate, or for no deduction, or for deeming a person to be an assessee in default, or for passing of an
order or amended order, or extending the time for payment, or allowing payment by instalment, or
reduction or waiver of interest, or for treating th e assessee as not being in default, or for levy of
penalty  or  for  drawing of  certificate  or  stay  of  proceedings  in  pursuance  of  certificate  and
amendment or cancellation thereof, by, or jurisdiction of, Tax Recovery Officer or other modes of
recovery or issuance of tax clearance certificate, with dynamic jurisdiction.
(2) The Central Government may, for the purpose of givi ng effect to the scheme made under sub-section (1),
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an y of the provisions of this Act shall not apply or shall
apply with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that no direction shall be issued after the 31st day of March, 2022.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may be after the
notification is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Recovery by suit or under other law not affected.