47. Sub. for "attained finality." by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

48. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

49. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

50. Sub. for "within the time allowed under that section" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

51. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

52. Omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023 w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
53-54.  Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

55. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024 w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

56. Word "and" omtt. by Act No. 15 of 2024 w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

57. Sub. for "or" by Act No. 15 of 2024 w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

58. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024 w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

59. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

60. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

61. Sub. for "2025" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.  Earlier "2025" was sub. for "2024" by Act No.
08 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

62. Omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

63. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.r.e.f. 1-4-1990.

64. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

65. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

66. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

67. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Prior to its substitution, Explanation  read as under:
'Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, "International Financial Services Centre" shall have
the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( q) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005
(28 of 2005);’

68. Omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

69. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

70. Clauses ( 46A) and ( 46B) Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

71. Omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

72. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 1-8-2024.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
93 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

73. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Special provision in respect of newly established undertakings in free trade zone, etc.

10A.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a deduc tion of such profits and gains as are derived by an
undertaking from the export of articles or things or computer software for a period of ten consecutive
assessment years beginning with the assessment year rele vant to the previous year in which the undertaking
begins to manufacture or produce such articles or thin gs or computer software, as the case may be, shall be
allowed from the total income of the assessee :
Provided  that where in computing the total income of the undertaking for any assessment year, its profits
and gains had not been included by application of the provisions of this section as it stood immediately
before its substitution by the Finance Act, 2000, the undertaking shall be entitled to deduction referred to inthis sub-section only for the unexpired period of the aforesaid ten consecutive assessment years :
Provided further  that where an undertaking initially located in any free trade zone or export processing
zone is subsequently located in a special economic zone  by reason of conversion of such free trade zone or
export  processing zone  into a  special economic  zone, the  period of ten consecutive  assessment  yearsreferred to in this sub-section shall be reckoned from the assessment year relevant to the previous year in
which the undertaking began to manufacture or produce such  articles or things or computer software in such
free trade zone or export processing zone :
Provided also  that for the assessment year beginning on th e 1st day of April, 2003, the deduction under this
sub-section shall be ninety per cent of the profit s and gains derived by an undertaking from the export of
such articles or things or computer software :
Provided also  that no deduction under this section shall be allowed to any undertaking for the assessment
year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2012 and subsequent years.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sectio n (1), the deduction, in computing the total income of
an undertaking, which begins to manufacture or produce articles or things or computer software during the
previous year relevant to any assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2003, in any
special economic zone, shall be,—
(i) hundred per cent of profits and gains derived from th e export of such articles or things or computer
software for a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment yearrelevant to the previous year in which the undertaking begins to manufacture or produce such
articles or things or computer software, as the case may be, and thereafter, fifty per cent of such
profits and gains for further two consecutive assessment years, and thereafter;
(ii) for the next three consecutive assessment years, so much of the amount not exceeding fifty per
cent of the profit as is debited to the profit an d loss account of the previous year in respect of
which the deduction is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be called the "SpecialEconomic Zone Re-investment Allowance Reserve Account") to be created and ut ilised for the
purposes of the business of the assessee in the manner laid down in sub-section (1B) :
Provided  that no deduction under this section shall be a llowed to an assessee who does not furnish a return
of his income on or before the due date specified under sub-section (1) of section 139.
(1B) The deduction under clause ( ii) of sub-section (1A) shall be allowed only if the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment Allowance Reserve Account is
to be utilised—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
94 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(i) for the purposes of acquiring new machinery or plant which is first put to use before the
expiry of a period of three years next followi ng the previous year in which the reserve was
created; and
(ii) until the  acquisition of new machinery or plant  as aforesaid, for the  purposes of the
business of the undertaking other than for distribution by way of dividends or profits or forremittance outside India as profits or for the creation of any asset outside India;
(b) the particulars, as may be prescribed in this be half, have been furnished by the assessee in respect
of new machinery or plant along with the return of income for the assessment year relevant to theprevious year in which such plant or machinery was first put to use.
(1C) Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment Allowance Reserve Account
under clause ( ii) of sub-section (1A),—
(a) has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub-section (1B), the am ount so
utilised; or
(b) has not been utilised before the expiry of the period specified in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of
sub-section (1B), the amount not so ut ilised,
shall be deemed to be the profits,—
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), in the year in which the amount was so ut ilised; or
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), in the year immediately following the period of three years
specified in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub-section (1B),
and shall be charged to tax accordingly.
(2) This section applies to any undertaking which fulfils all the following conditions, namely :—
(i) it has begun or begins to manufacture or produce arti cles or things or computer software during the
previous year relevant to the assessment year—
(a) commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1981, in any free trade zone; or
(b) commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1994, in any electronic hardware technology
park, or, as the case may be, software technology park;
(c) commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2001 in any special economic zone;
(ii) it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence :
Provided  that this condition shall not apply in respect of any undertaking which is formed as a
result of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business of any suchundertakings as is referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and within the period specified
in that section;
(iii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose.
Explanation.— The provisions of Explanation 1  and Explanation 2  to sub-section (2) of section 80-I shall
apply for the purposes of clause ( iii) of this sub-section as they apply for the purposes of clause ( ii) of that
sub-section.
(3) This section applies to the undertaking, if the sale proceeds of articles or things or computer software
exported out of India are received in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange,
within a period of six months from the end of the pr evious year or, within such further period as the
competent authority may allow in this behalf.
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of this sub-section, the  expression "competent authority" means the
Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in force for
regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
Explanation 2. —The sale proceeds referred to in this sub-se ction shall be deemed to have been received inINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
95 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
India where  such sale  proceeds are  credited to a  separate  account maintained for the  purpose  by the
assessee with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve Bank of India.
(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (1A), the profits derived from export of articles or things or
computer software shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the business of the undertaking, the
same proportion as the export turnover in respect of such articles or things or computer software bears to the
total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking.
(5) The deduction under this section shall not be admissible for any assessment year beginning on or after
the 1st day of April, 2001, unless the assessee furnishes in the prescribed form, the report of an accountant,
as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288 before the specified date referred to in
section 44AB, certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, in computing the total income of
the assessee of the previous year relevant to the a ssessment year immediately succeeding the last of the
relevant assessment years, or of any previous year, relevant to any subsequent assessment year,—
(i) section 32, section 32A, section 33, section 35 and clause ( ix) of sub-section (1) of section 36 shall
apply as if every allowance or deduction referred to therein and relating to or allowable for any of
the relevant assessment years ending before the 1st day of April, 2001, in relation to any building,
machinery, plant  or furniture  used for the  purposes of the  business of the  undertaking in theprevious year relevant to such assessment year or any expenditure incurred for the purposes of
such business in such previous year had been given full effect to for that assessment year itself and
accordingly sub-section (2) of section 32, clause ( ii) of sub-section (3) of section 32A, clause ( ii) of
sub-section (2) of section 33, sub-section (4) of section 35 or the second proviso to clause ( ix) of
sub-section (1) of section 36, as the case may be, shall not apply in relation to any such allowance
or deduction;
(ii) no loss referred to in sub-section (1) of section 72 or sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of section
74, in so far as such loss relates to the business of the undertaking, shall be carried forward or set
off where such loss relates to any of the relevant assessment years ending before the 1st day ofApril, 2001;
(iii) no deduction shall be allowed under section 80HH or section 80HHA or section 80-I or section
80-IA or section 80-IB in relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking; and
(iv) in computing the depreciation allowance under s ection 32, the written down value of any asset
used for the purposes of the business of the undertaking shall be computed as if the assessee had
claimed and been actually allowed the deduction in respect of depreciation for each of the relevantassessment year.
(7) The provisions of sub-section (8) and sub-section (10)  of section 80-IA shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the undertaking referred to in this section as they apply for the purposes of the undertaking
referred to in section 80-IA.
(7A) Where any undertaking of an Indian company whic h is entitled to the deduction under this section is
transferred, before the expiry of the period specified in this section, to another Indian company in a schemeof amalgamation or demerger,—
(a) no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the amalgamating or the demerged company
for the previous year in which the amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and
(b) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the amalgamated or the resulting
company  as they  would  have  applied  to  the  amalgamating or  the  demerged  company  if  theamalgamation or demerger had not taken place.
(7B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any undertaking, being a Unit referred to in clause ( zc)
of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, which has begun or begins to manufacture or produce
articles or things or computer software during the pr evious year relevant to the assessment year commencingINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
96 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
on or after the 1st day of April, 2006 in any Special Economic Zone.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, where the assessee,
before the due date for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139, furnishes to the
Assessing Officer a declaration in writing that the provi sions of this section may not be made applicable to
him, the provisions of this section shall not apply to him for any of the relevant assessment years.
(9) [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2003, w .e.f. 1-4-2004. ]
(9A) [ Omitted by the Finance Act, 2003, w .e.f. 1-4-2004. ]
Explanation 1.—  [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2003, w.e.f. 1-4-2004. ]
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "computer software" means—
(a) any  computer  programme  recorded  on  any  disc,  tape,  perforated  media  or  other
information storage device; or
(b) any customized electronic data or any product or service of s imilar nature, as may be
notified by the Board,
which is transmitted or exported from India to any place outside India by any means;
(ii) "convertible foreign exchange" means foreign exchange which is for the time being treated by the
Reserve Bank of India as convertible foreign exchange for the purposes of the Foreign ExchangeManagement Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), and any rules made thereunder or any other corresponding
law for the time being in force;
(iii) "electronic hardware technology park" means any park set up in accordance with the Electronic
Hardware Technology Park (EHTP) Scheme notified by the Government of India in the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry;
(iv) "export turnover" means the consideration in resp ect of export by the undertaking of articles or
things or computer software received in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible
foreign  exchange  in  accordance  with  sub-section  (3),  but  does  not  include  freight,
telecommunication charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things orcomputer software outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in providing the
technical services outside India;
(v) "free  trade  zone"  means the  Kandla  Free  Trade  Zone  and  the  Santacruz Electronics  Export
Processing Zone and includes any other free trade zone which the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of this section;
(vi) "relevant assessment year" means any assessment year falling within a period of ten consecutive
assessment years referred to in this section;
(vii) "software technology park" means any park set up in accordance with the Software Technology
Park Scheme notified by the Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry;
(viii) "special economic zone" means a zone which the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify as a special economic zone for the purposes of this section.
Explanation 3.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declar ed that the profits and gains derived from on
site development of computer software (including services for development of software) outside India shall
be deemed to be the profits and gains derived from the export of computer software outside India.
Explanation 4.— For the purposes of this section, "manufactu re or produce" shall include the cutting and
polishing of precious and semi-precious stones.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
97 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Special provisions in respect of newl y established Units in Special Economic Zones .

10AA.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, in computing the total income of an assessee, being an
entrepreneur as referred to in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005),
from his Unit, who begins to manufacture or produce ar ticles or things or provide any services during the
previous year relevant to any assessment year commenc ing on or after the 1st day of April, 2006, but before
the first day of April, 2021, the following deduction shall be allowed—
(i) hundred per cent of profits and gains derived from the export, of such articles or things or from
services for a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment yearrelevant to the previous year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or
things or provide services, as the case may be, and fifty per cent of such profits and gains for
further five assessment years and thereafter;
(ii) for the next five consecutive assessment years, so much of the amount not exceeding fifty per cent
of the profit as is debited to the profit and loss account of the previous year in respect of which the
deduction is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be called the "Special EconomicZone Re-investment Reserve Account") to be created and ut ilized for the purposes of the business
of the assessee in the manner laid down in sub-section (2):
74[Provided  that no such deduction shall be allowed to an assessee who does not furnish a return of income
on or before the due date specified under sub-section (1) of section 139.]
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amount of deduction under this
section shall be allowed from the total income of the assessee computed in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, before giving effect to the provisions of this section and the deduction under this section shall not
exceed such total income of the assessee.
(2) The deduction under clause ( ii) of sub-section (1) shall be allowed only if the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely :—
(a) the  amount  credited to  the  Special Economic  Zone  Re-investment  Reserve  Account  is to be
utilised—
(i) for the purposes of acquiring machinery or plant which is first put to use before the expiry
of a period of three years following the previous year in which the reserve was created;
and
(ii) until the acquisition of the machinery or plant as aforesaid, for the purposes of the business
of  the  undertaking other  than  for  distribution  by  way  of  dividends or  profits or  for
remittance outside India as profits or for the creation of any asset outside India;
(b) the particulars, as may be specified by the Central Board of Direct Taxes in this behalf, under
clause ( b) of sub-section (1B) of section 10A have been furnished by the assessee in respect of
machinery or plant along with the return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous
year in which such plant or machinery was first put to use.
(3) Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment Reserve Account under clause
(ii) of sub-section (1),—
(a) has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub-section (2), the am ount so
utilised; or
(b) has not been utilised before the expiry of the period specified in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of
sub-section (2), the amount not so ut ilised,
shall be deemed to be the profits,—
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), in the year in which the amount was so ut ilised; or
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), in the year immediately following the period of three years
specified in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub-section (2),INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
98 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
and shall be charged to tax accordingly:
Provided  that where in computing the total income of the Unit for any assessment year, its profits and gains
had not been included by application of the provisions of sub-section (7B) of section 10A, the undertaking,
being the Unit shall be entitled to deduction referred to in this sub-section only for the unexpired period of
ten consecutive assessment years and thereafter it shall be eligible for deduction from income as provided inclause ( ii) of sub-section (1).
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that an undertaking, being the Unit, which
had already availed, before the commencement of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005), the
deductions referred to in section 10A for ten consecutive assessment years, such Unit shall not be eligible fordeduction from income under this section :
Provided further  that where a Unit initially located in any free trade zone or export processing zone is
subsequently located in a Special Economic Zone by reason of conversion of such free trade zone or export
processing zone into a Special Economic Zone, the period of ten consecutive assessment years referred toabove shall be reckoned from the assessment year releva nt to the previous year in which the Unit began to
manufacture, or produce or process such articles or thin gs or services in such free trade zone or export
processing zone :
Provided also  that  where  a  Unit  initially located in any free  trade  zone  or export processing zone  is
subsequently located in a Special Economic Zone by reason of conversion of such free trade zone or export
processing zone into a Special Economic Zone and has completed the period of ten consecutive assessment
years referred to above, it shall not be eligible fo r deduction from income as provided in clause ( ii) o f
sub-section (1) with effect from the 1st day of April, 2006.
(4) This section applies to any undertaking, being the  Unit, which fulfils all the  following conditions,
namely:—
(i) it has begun or begins to manufacture or produce articles or things or provide services during the
previous year relevant to the assessment year co mmencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2006 in
any Special Economic Zone;
(ii) it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence:
Provided that this condition shall not apply in respect of any undertaking, being the Unit, which is
formed as a result of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the businessof any such undertaking as is referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and within the period
specified in that section;
(iii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business, of machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose.
Explanation. —The provisions of Explanations 1 and 2 to sub-section (3) of sec-tion 80-IA shall apply for
the  purposes of  clause  ( iii)  of  this sub-section  as they  apply  for  the  purposes of  clause  ( ii) o f t h a t
sub-section.
75[(4A) This section applies to a Unit, if the proceeds fro m sale of goods or provision of services is received
in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible  foreign exchange, within a period of six months from
the end of the previous year or, within such furthe r period as the competent authority may allow in this
behalf.
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of this sub-section, the  expression "competent authority" means the
Reserve Bank of India or the authority authorised under any law for the time being in force for regulating
payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
Explanation 2. —The sale of goods or provision of services sh all be deemed to have been received in India
where such export turnover is credited to a separate account maintained for that purpose by the assessee
with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve Bank of India.]
(5) Where any undertaking being the Unit which is entitled to the deduction under this section is transferred,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
99 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
before the expiry of the period specified in this sect ion, to another undertaking, being the Unit in a scheme
of amalgamation or demerger,—
(a) no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the amalgamating or the demerged Unit,
being the company for the previous year in which the amalgamation or the demerger takes place;
and
(b) the  provisions of  this section  shall,  as they  would  have  applied  to  the  amalgamating or  the
demerged Unit being the company as if the amalgamation or demerger had not taken place.
(6) Loss referred to in sub-section (1) of section 72 or  sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of section 74, in so
far as such loss relates to the business of the undertak ing, being the Unit shall be allowed to be carried
forward or set off.
(7) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the profits deri ved from the export of articles or things or services
(including computer  software)  shall be  the  amount  which  bears to  the  profits of  the  business of  the
undertaking, being the Unit, the same proportion as the export turnover in respect of such articles or things
or services bears to the total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking :
Provided  that the provisions of this sub-section [as amended by section 6 of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2009
(33 of 2009)] shall have  effect  for the  assessment  year beginning on the  1st  day of April, 2006 andsubsequent assessment years.
(8) The provisions of sub-sections (5) and (6) of section 10A shall apply to the articles or things or services
referred to in sub-section (1) as if—
(a) for the figures, letters and word "1st April, 2001", the figures, letters and word "1st April, 2006"
had been substituted;
(b) for the word "undertaking", the words "undertaking, being the Unit" had been substituted.
(9) The provisions of sub-section (8) and sub-section (10)  of section 80-IA shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the undertaking referred to in this section as they apply for the purposes of the undertakingreferred to in section 80-IA.
(10) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed in respect of profits of any of the specified
business, referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section (8) of section 35AD, for any assessment year, no deduction
shall be allowed under the provisions of section 35AD in relation to such specified business for the same or
any other assessment year.
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of this section,—
76[(i)"convertible  foreign  exchange"  shall  have  the  meaning assigned  to  it  in  clause  ( ii)  of  the
Explanation 2  to section 10A;
(ia) "export turnover" means the consideration in respect of export by the undertaking, being the Unit
of articles or things or services received in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible
foreign exchange in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4A), but does not include
freight, telecommunication charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things
outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services (includingcomputer software) outside India;]
(ii) "export in relation to the Special Economic Zones"  means taking goods or providing services out of
India from a Special Economic Zone by land, sea, air, or by any other mode, whether physical orotherwise;
(iii) "manufacture" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( r) of section 2 of the Special
Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);
(iv) "relevant  assessment  year"  means  any  assessment  year  falling  within  a  period  of  fifteen
consecutive assessment years referred to in this section;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
100 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(v) "Special Economic Zone" and "Unit" shall have the same meanings as assigned to them under
clauses ( za) and ( zc) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005).
Explanation 2. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby decl ared that the profits and gains derived from on
site development of computer software (including services for development of software) outside India shallbe deemed to be the profits and gains derived from the export of computer software outside India.

74. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

75. Ins. by Act No. 8 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

76. Clauses ( i) and ( ia) sub. for clause ( i) by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.
Special provisions in respect of newly established hundred per cent export-oriented undertakings.

10B.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a deduc tion of such profits and gains as are derived by a
hundred per cent export-oriented undertaking from the export of articles or things or computer software for
a period of ten consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previousyear in which the undertaking begins to manufacture or  produce articles or things or computer software, as
the case may be, shall be allowed from the total income of the assessee :
Provided  that where in computing the total income of the undertaking for any assessment year, its profits
and gains had not been included by application of the provisions of this section as it stood immediatelybefore its substitution by the Finance Act, 2000, the undertaking shall be entitled to the deduction referred
to in this sub-section only for the unexpired period of aforesaid ten consecutive assessment years :
Provided further  that for the assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2003, the deduction under
this sub-section shall be ninety per cent of the prof its and gains derived by an undertaking from the export of
such articles or things or computer software:
Provided also  that no deduction under this section shall be allowed to any undertaking for the assessment
year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2012 and subsequent years :
Provided also  that no deduction under this section shall be  allowed to an assessee who does not furnish a
return of his income on or before the due date specified under sub-section (1) of section 139.
(2) This section applies to any undertaking which fulfils all the following conditions, namely :—
(i) it manufactures or produces any articles or things or computer software;
(ii) it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence :
Provided  that this condition shall not apply in respect of any undertaking which is formed as a
result of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business of any such
undertaking as is referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and within the period specified inthat section;
(iii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose.
Explanation.— The provisions of Explanation 1 and Explanation 2 to sub-section (2) of section 80-I shall
apply for the purposes of clause ( iii) of this sub-section as they apply for the purposes of clause ( ii) of that
sub-section.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
101 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(3) This section applies to the undertaking, if the sale proceeds of articles or things or computer software
exported out of India are received in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange,
within a period of six months from the end of the pr evious year or, within such further period as the
competent authority may allow in this behalf.
Explanation 1.— For the  purposes of this sub-section, the  expression "competent  authority" means the
Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in force for
regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
Explanation 2.— The sale proceeds referred to in this sub-section shall be deemed to have been received in
India where  such sale  proceeds are  credited to a  separate  account maintained for the  purpose  by theassessee with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve Bank of India.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the profits de rived from export of articles or things or computer
software  shall be  the  amount  which bears to the  profits of the  business of the  undertaking, the  same
proportion as the export turnover in respect of such articles or things or computer software bears to the totalturnover of the business carried on by the undertaking.
(5) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be admissible for any assessment year beginning on or
after the 1st day of April, 2001, unless the assessee furnishes in the prescribed form, along with the return of
income, the report of an accountant, as defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288,
certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, in computing the total income of
the assessee of the previous year relevant to the a ssessment year immediately succeeding the last of the
relevant assessment years, or of any previous year, relevant to any subsequent assessment year,—
(i) section 32, section 32A, section 33, section 35 and clause ( ix) of sub-section (1) of section 36 shall
apply as if every allowance or deduction referred to therein and relating to or allowable for any ofthe relevant assessment years ending before the 1st day of April, 2001, in relation to any building,
machinery, plant  or furniture  used for the  purposes of the  business of the  undertaking in the
previous year relevant to such assessment year or any expenditure incurred for the purposes ofsuch business in such previous year had been given full effect to for that assessment year itself and
accordingly sub-section (2) of section 32, clause ( ii) of sub-section (3) of section 32A, clause ( ii) of
sub-section (2) of section 33, sub-section (4) of section 35 or the second proviso to clause ( ix) of
sub-section (1) of section 36, as the case may be, shall not apply in relation to any such allowance
or deduction;
(ii) no loss referred to in sub-section (1) of section 72 or sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of section
74, in so far as such loss relates to the business of the undertaking, shall be carried forward or
set-off where such loss relates to any of the rele vant assessment years ending before the 1st day of
April, 2001;
(iii) no deduction shall be allowed under section 80HH or section 80HHA or section 80-I or section
80-IA or section 80-IB in relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking; and
(iv) in computing the depreciation allowance under s ection 32, the written down value of any asset
used for the purposes of the business of the undertaking shall be computed as if the assessee had
claimed and been actually allowed the deduction in respect of depreciation for each of the relevant
assessment year.
(7) The provisions of sub-section (8) and sub-section (10)  of section 80-IA shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the undertaking referred to in this section as they apply for the purposes of the undertakingreferred to in section 80-IA.
(7A) Where any undertaking of an Indian company whic h is entitled to the deduction under this section is
transferred, before the expiry of the period specified in this section, to another Indian company in a scheme
of amalgamation or demerger—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
102 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the amalgamating or the demerged company
for the previous year in which the amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and
(b) the  provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply to the  amalgamated or resulting
company  as they  would  have  applied  to  the  amalgamating or  the  demerged  company  if  the
amalgamation or the demerger had not taken place.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, where the assessee,
before the due date for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139, furnishes to theAssessing Officer a declaration in writing that the provi sions of this section may not be made applicable to
him, the provisions of this section shall not apply to him for any of the relevant assessment year.
(9) [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2003, w .e.f. 1-4-2004. ]
(9A) [ Omitted by the Finance Act, 2003, w .e.f. 1-4-2004. ]
Explanation 1.—  [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2003, w.e.f. 1-4-2004. ]
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "computer software" means—
(a) any  computer  programme  recorded  on  any  disc,  tape,  perforated  media  or  other
information storage device; or
(b) any customized electronic data or any product or service of s imilar nature  as may be
notified by the Board,
which is transmitted or exported from India to any place outside India by any means;
(ii) "convertible foreign exchange" means foreign exchange which is for the time being treated by the
Reserve Bank of India as convertible foreign exchange for the purposes of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), and any rules made thereunder or any other correspondinglaw for the time being in force;
(iii) "export turnover" means the consideration in resp ect of export by the undertaking of articles or
things or computer software received in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible
foreign  exchange  in  accordance  with  sub-section  (3),  but  does  not  include  freight,
telecommunication charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things or
computer software outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in providing thetechnical services outside India;
(iv) "hundred per cent export-oriented undertaking" means an undertaking which has been approved as
a hundred per cent export-oriented undertaking by the  Board appointed in this behalf by the
Central  Government  in  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred  by  section  14  of  the  Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), and the rules made under that Act;
(v) "relevant assessment years" means any assessment years falling within a period of ten consecutive
assessment years, referred to in this section.
Explanation 3.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declar ed that the profits and gains derived from on
site development of computer software (including services for development of software) outside India shall
be deemed to be the profits and gains derived from the export of computer software outside India.
Explanation 4.— For the purposes of this section, "manufactu re or produce" shall include the cutting and
polishing of precious and semi-precious stones.
Special provisions in respect of export of certain articles or things.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
103 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
10BA . (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a deduc tion of such profits and gains as are derived by a n
undertaking from the export out of India of eligible arti cles or things, shall be allowed from the total income
of the assessee :
Provided  that where in computing the total income of the undertaking for any assessment year, deduction
under section 10A or section 10B has been claimed, the undertaking shall not be entitled to the deductionunder this section :
Provided further  that  no  deduction  under  this  section  shall be  allowed  to  any  undertaking for  the
assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2010 and subsequent years.
(2) This section applies to any undertaking which fulfils the following conditions, namely :—
(a) it  manufactures  or  produces  the  eligible  articl es  or  things  without  the  use  of  imported  raw
materials;
(b) it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence :
Provided  that this condition shall not apply in respect of any undertaking which is formed as a
result of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business of any such
undertaking as is referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and within the period specified inthat section;
(c) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose.
Explanation.— The provisions of Explanation 1 and Explanation 2 to sub-section (2) of section
80-I shall apply for the purposes of this clause  as they apply for the purposes of clause ( ii) of
sub-section (2) of that section;
(d) ninety per cent or more of its sales during the prev ious year relevant to the assessment year are by
way of exports of the eligible articles or things;
(e) it employs twenty or more workers during the previous year in the process of manufacture or
production.
(3) This section applies to the undertaking, if the sale proceeds of the eligible articles or things exported out
of India are received in or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange, within a
period of six months from the end of the previous year or, within such further period as the competent
authority may allow in this behalf.
Explanation. —For  the  purposes  of  this  sub-section,  the  expression  "competent  authority"  means  the
Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in force for
regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the profits derive d from export out of India of the eligible articles or
things shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the business of the undertaking, the same proportion
as the export turnover in respect of such articles or th ings bears to the total turnover of the business carried
on by the undertaking.
(5)  The  deduction  under  sub-section  (1)  shall not  be  admissible,  unless the  assessee  furnishes in  the
prescribed form, along with the return of income, the report of an accountant, as defined in the Explanation
below sub-section (2) of section 288, certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, where a deduction is allowed
under this section in computing the total income of the assessee, no deduction shall be allowed under anyother section in respect of its export profits.
(7) The provisions of sub-section (8) and sub-section (10)  of section 80-IA shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the undertaking referred to in this section as they apply for the purposes of the undertaking
referred to in section 80-IA.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
104 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "convertible foreign exchange" means foreign exchange which is for the time being treated by the
Reserve Bank of India as convertible foreign exchange for the purposes of the Foreign ExchangeManagement Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), and any rules made thereunder or any other corresponding
law for the time being in force;
(b) "eligible articles or things" means all hand-made articles or things, which are of artistic value and
which requires the use of wood as the main raw material;
(c) "export turnover" means the consideration in respect of export by the undertaking of eligible
articles or things received in, or brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange
in accordance with sub-section (3), but does not include freight, telecommunication charges or
insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things outside India;
(d) "export out of India" shall not include any transaction by way of sale or otherwise, in a shop,
emporium or any other establishment situate in India, not involving clearance of any customs
station as defined in the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).
Meaning of computer programmes in certain cases.

10BB.  The profits and gains derived by an undertakin g from the production of computer programmes under
section 10B, as it stood prior to its substitution by section 7 of the Finance Act, 2000 (10 of 2000), shall be
construed as if for the words "computer programmes", the words "computer programmes or processing or
management of electronic data" had been substituted in that section.
Special provision in respect of certain industrial undertakings in North- Eastern Region.

10C.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any profits and gains derived by an assessee from an
industrial undertaking, which has begun or begins to ma nufacture or produce any article or thing on or after
the 1st day of April, 1998 in any Integrated Infrastructure Development Centre or Industrial Growth Centre
located in the North-Eastern Region (hereafter in this section referred to as the industrial undertaking) shall
not be included in the total income of the assessee.
(2) This section applies to any industrial undertaking which fulfils all the following conditions, namely :—
(i) it is not formed by the splitting up, or the reconstruction of, a business already in existence :
Provided that this condition shall not apply in respect of any industrial undertaking which is
formed as a result of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business
of any such industrial undertaking as is referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and within
the period specified in that section ;
(ii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose.
Explanation .—The provisions of Explanation 1 and Explanation 2 to sub-section (3) of section 80-IA shall
apply for the purposes of clause ( ii) of this sub-section as they apply for the purposes of clause ( ii) of that
sub-section.
(3) The profits and gains referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be included in the total income of theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
105 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
assessee in respect of ten consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the
previous year in which the industrial undertaking begins to manufacture or produce articles or things.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, in computing the total income of
the assessee of any previous year relevant to any subsequent assessment year,—
(i) section 32, section 35 and clause ( ix) of sub-section (1) of section 36 shall apply as if deduction
referred to therein and relating to or allowable fo r any of the relevant assessment years, in relation
to any building, machinery, plant or furniture used  for the purposes of the business of the industrial
undertaking in the previous year relevant to such assessment year or any expenditure incurred for
the  purposes  of  such  business  in  such  previous  year  had  been given full effect  to  for  that
assessment year itself and, accordingly, sub-sectio n (2) of section 32, sub-section (4) of section 35
or the second proviso to clause ( ix) of sub-section (1) of section 36, as the case may be, shall not
apply in relation to any such deduction;
(ii) no loss referred to in sub-section (1) of section 72 or sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of section
74, in so far as such loss relates to the business of the industrial undertaking, shall be carried
forward or set off where such loss relates to any of the relevant assessment years;
(iii) no deduction shall be allowed under section 80HH or section 80HHA or section 80-I or section
80-IA or section 80-IB or section 80JJA in rela tion to the  profits and gains of the  industrial
undertakings; and
(iv) in computing the depreciation allowance under s ection 32, the written down value of any asset
used for the purposes of the business of the indus trial undertaking shall be computed as if the
assessee had claimed and been actually allowed the deduction in respect of depreciation for each
of the relevant assessment years.
(5) The provisions of sub-section (8) and sub-section (10)  of section 80-IA shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the  industrial undertaking referred to in this section as they apply for the  purposes of the
industrial undertaking referred to in section 80-IA or section 80-IB, as the case may be.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, where the assessee before
the due date for furnishing the return of his income under sub-section (1) of section 139, furnishes to the
Assessing Officer a declaration in writing that the provi sions of this section may not be made applicable to
him, the provisions of this section shall not apply to him in any of the relevant assessment years :
Provided that no deduction under this section shall be allowed to any undertaking for the assessment year
beginning on the 1st day of April, 2004 and subsequent years.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "Integrated Infrastructure Development Centre" m eans such centres located in the States of the
North-Eastern Region, which the Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify for the purposes of this section;
(ii) "Industrial Growth Centre" means such centres located in the States of the North-Eastern Region,
which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes
of this section;
(iii) "North-Eastern Region" means the region comprising the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura;
(iv) "relevant assessment years" means the ten consecutive years beginning with the year in which the
industrial undertaking begins to manufacture or produce articles or things.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
106 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Income from propert y held for charitable or reli gious purposes .

11. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 60 to 63, th e following income shall not be included in the total
income of the previous year of the person in receipt of the income—
(a) income derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable or religious purposes, to the
extent to which such income is applied to such purposes in India; and, where any such income isaccumulated or set apart for application to such purposes in India, to the extent to which the
income so accumulated or set apart is not in excess of fifteen per cent of the income from such
property;
(b) income derived from property held under trust in part only for such purposes, the trust having been
created before the commencement of this Act, to the extent to which such income is applied to
such purposes in India; and, where any such inco me is finally set apart for application to such
purposes in India, to the extent to which the income  so set apart is not in excess of fifteen per cent
of the income from such property;
(c) income derived from property held under trust—
(i) created on or after the 1st day of April, 1952, for a charitable purpose which tends to
promote international welfare  in which India is interested, to the extent  to which such
income is applied to such purposes outside India, and
(ii) for charitable or religious purposes, created be fore the 1st day of April, 1952, to the extent
to which such income is applied to such purposes outside India:
Provided  that the Board, by general or special order, has directed in either case that it shall not be
included in the total income of the person in receipt of such income;
(d) income in the form of voluntary contributions made with a specific direction that they shall form
part  of  the  corpus  of  the  trust  or  institution,  subject  to  the  condition  that  such  voluntarycontributions  are  invested  or  deposited  in  one  or  more  of  the  forms  or  modes  specified  in
sub-section (5) maintained specifically for such corpus.
Explanation 1 .—For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b),—
(1) in computing the fifteen per cent of the income which may be accumulated or set apart, any such
voluntary contributions as are referred to in section 12 shall be deemed to be part of the income;
(2) if, in the previous year, the income applied to ch aritable or religious purposes in India falls short of
eighty-five per cent of the income derived during that year from property held under trust, or, asthe case may be, held under trust in part, by any amount—
(i) for the reason that the whole or any part of the income has not been received during that
year, or
(ii) for any other reason,
then—
(a) in the case referred to in sub-clause ( i), so much of the income applied to such purposes in
India during the previous year in which the income is received or during the previous year
immediately following as does not exceed the said am ount, and
(b) in the case referred to in sub-clause ( ii), so much of the income applied to such purposes in
India  during the  previous  year  immediately  following the  previous  year  in  which  the
income was derived as does not exceed the said amount,
may, at the option of the person in receipt of the income (such option to be exercised 
77[at least
two months prior to the due date specified] under sub-section (1) of section 139 for furnishing thereturn of income, in such form and manner as may be prescribed) be deemed to be income applied
to such purposes during the previous year in wh ich the income was derived; and the income so
deemed to have been applied shall not be taken into account in calculating the amount of incomeINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
107 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
applied to such purposes, in the case referred to in sub-clause ( i), during the previous year in which
the income is received or during the previous year immediately following, as the case may be, and,in the  case  referred to in  sub-clause  ( ii),  during the  previous  year  immediately  following the
previous year in which the income was derived.
Explanation 2. —Any amount credited or paid, out of income referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) read with
Explanation 1 , to any fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational institution or any
hospital or other medical institution referred to in sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or
sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of section 10 or other trust or institution registered under section 12AA or
section 12AB, as the case may be , being contribution with a specific direction that it shall form part of the
corpus, shall not be treated as application of income for charitable or religious purposes.
Explanation 3. —For the purposes of determining the amount of application under clause ( a) or clause ( b),
the provisions of sub-clause ( ia) of clause ( a) of section 40 and sub-sections (3) and (3A) of section 40A,
shall, mutatis mutandis , apply as they apply in computing the income chargeable under the head "Profits and
gains of business or profession".
Explanation 3A .—For the purposes of this sub-section, where the property held under a trust or institution
includes any temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or other place notified under clause ( b) of sub-section (2) of
section 80G, any sum received by such trust or in stitution as voluntary contribution for the purpose of
renovation or repair of such temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or other place, may, at its option, be treated
by such trust or institution as forming part of the co rpus of the trust or the institution, subject to the
condition that the trust or the institution,—
(a) applies such corpus only for the purpose for which the voluntary contribution was made;
(b) does not apply such corpus for making contribution or donation to any person;
(c) maintains such corpus as separately identifiable; and
(d) invests or deposits such corpus in the forms an d modes specified under sub-section (5) of section

11.
Explanation 3B .—For the purposes of  Explanation 3A , where any trust or institution has treated any sum
received by it as forming part of the corpus, and subs equently any of the conditions specified in clause ( a) or
clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of the said  Explanation is violated, such sum shall be deemed to be the
income of such trust or institution of the previous year during which the violation takes place.
Explanation 4. —For the purposes of determining the amount of application under clause ( a) or clause ( b),—
(i
) application for charitable or religious purposes from the corpus as referred to in clause ( d) of this
sub-section, shall not be treated as application of income for charitable or religious purposes:
Provided  that  the  amount  not  so  treated  as application,  or  part  thereof,  shall be  treated  as
application for charitable or religious purposes in the previous year in which the amount, or partthereof, is invested or deposited back, into one  or more  of the  forms or modes specified in
sub-section (5) maintained specifically for such corpus, from the income of that year and to the
extent of such investment or 
78[deposit:]
79[Provided further  that provisions of the first proviso shall apply only if there was no violation of
the conditions specified—
(a) in clause ( c) of this sub-section;
(b)i n  Explanations 2, 3  and 5 of this sub-section;
(c)i n  t h e  Explanation  to this section; and
(d) in clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section 13,
at the time the application was made from the corpus:INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
108 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided also  that the amount invested or deposited back shall not be treated as application for
charitable or religious purposes under the first proviso unless such investment or deposit is madewithin a period of five years from the end of the previous year in which such application was made
from the corpus:
Provided also  that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply where application from the
corpus is made on or before the 31st day of March, 2021;]
(ii) application for charitable or religious purposes, fro m any loan or borrowing, shall not be treated as
application of income for charitable or religious purposes:
Provided  that  the  amount  not  so  treated  as application,  or  part  thereof,  shall be  treated  as
application for charitable or religious purposes in the previous year in which the loan or borrowing,
or part thereof, is repaid from the income of that year and to the extent of such repayment:
79a[Provided further  that provisions of the first proviso shall apply only if there was no violation
of the conditions specified—
(a) in clause ( c) of this sub-section;
(b)i n  Explanations 2, 3  and 5 of this sub-section;
(c)i n  t h e  Explanation  to this section; and
(d) in clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section 13,
at the time the application was made from loan or borrowing:
Provided also  that the amount repaid shall not be treated as application for charitable or religious
purposes under the first proviso unless such repayment is made within a period of five years from
the end of the previous year in which such application was made from loan or borrowing:
Provided also  that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply where application from any
loan or borrowing is made on or before the 31st day of March, 2021; and]
80[(iii)any amount credited or paid, other than the amount referred to in Explanation 2,  to any fund or
trust or institution or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical
institution referred to in sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of
clause ( 23C) of section 10, as the case may be, or other trust or institution registered under section
12AB, as the case may be, shall be treated as application for charitable or religious purposes only
to the extent of eighty-five per cent of such amount credited or paid.]
Explanation 5. —For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby clarified that the calculation of income
required to be  applied or accumulated during the  previous year shall be  made  without  any set  off or
deduction or allowance of any excess application of any of the year preceding the previous year.
(1A) For the purposes of sub-section (1),—
(a) where a capital asset, being property held under trust wholly for charitable or religious purposes, is
transferred and the  whole or any part  of the  net  consideration is utilised for acquiring anothercapital asset to be so held, then, the capital gain  arising from the transfer shall be deemed to have
been applied to charitable or religious purposes to the extent specified hereunder, namely:—
(i) where the whole of the net consideration is utilised in acquiring the new capital asset, the
whole of such capital gain;
(ii) where only a part of the net consideration is utilised for acquiring the new capital asset, so
much of such capital gain as is equal to the amount, if any, by which the amount so ut ilised
exceeds the cost of the transferred asset;
(b) where a capital asset, being property held under trust in part only for such purposes, is transferred
and the whole or any part of the net consideration is utilised for acquiring another capital asset tobe so held, then, the appropriate fraction of the capital gain arising from the  transfer shall be
deemed to have been applied to charitable or religious purposes to the extent specified hereunder,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
109 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
namely:—
(i) where the whole of the net consideration is utilised in acquiring the new capital asset, the
whole of the appropriate fraction of such capital gain;
(ii) in any other case, so much of the appropriate fra ction of the capital gain as is equal to the
amount, if any, by which the appropriate fraction of the amount ut ilised for acquiring the
new asset exceeds the appropriate fraction of the cost of the transferred asset.
Explanation. —In this sub-section,—
(i) "appropriate fraction" means the fraction which repr esents the extent to which the income derived
from the capital asset transferred was immediately before such transfer applicable to charitable orreligious purposes;
(ii) "cost of the transferred asset" means the aggregate of the cost of acquisition (as ascertained for the
purposes of sections 48 and 49) of the capital asset which is the subject of the transfer and the costof any improvement thereto within the meaning assigned to that expression in sub-clause ( b) of
clause ( 1) of section 55;
(iii) "net consideration" means the full value of the cons ideration received or accruing as a result of the
transfer of the capital asset as reduced by any expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in
connection with such transfer.
(1B) Where any income in respect of which an option is exercised under clause ( 2) of the Explanation  to
sub-section (1) is not applied to charitable or religi ous purposes in India during the period referred to in
sub-clause ( a) or, as the case may be, sub-clause ( b), of the said clause, then, such income shall be deemed
to be the income of the person in receipt thereof—
(a) in the case referred to in sub-clause ( i)  of  the  said  clause,  of  the  previous  year  immediately
following the previous year in which the income was received; or
(b) i n the case referred to i n sub-cl ause ( ii)  of  the  said  clause,  of  the  previous year  immediately
following the previous year in which the income was derived.
(2) Where eighty-five per cent of the income referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section (1) read
with the Explanation  to that sub-section is not applied, or is not deemed to have been applied, to charitable
or religious purposes in India during the previous year but is accumulated or set apart, either in whole or in
part, for application to such purposes in India, such income so accumulated or set apart shall not be included
in the total income of the previous year of the pe rson in receipt of the income, provided the following
conditions are complied with, namely:—
(a) such person furnishes a statement in the prescribed form and in the prescribed manner to the
Assessing Officer, stating the purpose for which th e income is being accumulated or set apart and
the period for which the income is to be accumulat ed or set apart, which shall in no case exceed
five years;
(b) the money so accumulated or set apart is invested or deposited in the forms or modes specified in
sub-section (5);
(c)the statement referred to in clause ( a) is furnished 
81[at least two months prior to] the due date
specified under sub-section (1) of section 139 for furnishing the return of income for the previousyear:
Provided that in computing the period of five years referred to in clause ( a), the period during which the
income could not be applied for the purpose for which it is so accumulated or set apart, due to an order or
injunction of any court, shall be excluded.
Explanation.— Any amount  credited or paid, out  of income  referred to in clause  ( a) or clause ( b) o f
sub-section (1), read with the Explanation to that sub-section, which is not applied, but is accumulated or set
apart, to any trust or institution registered under sect ion 12AA or section 12AB or to any fund or institution
or trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution referredINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
110 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
to in sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of section 10,
shall not be treated as application of income for char itable or religious purposes, either during the period of
accumulation or thereafter.
(3) Any income referred to in sub-section (2) which—
(a) is applied to purposes other than charitable or religious purposes as aforesaid or ceases to be
accumulated or set apart for application thereto, or
(b) ceases to remain invested or deposited in any of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5), or
(c) is not utilised for the purpose for which it is so accumulated or set apart during the period referred
to in clause ( a) of that sub-section,
(d) is credited or paid to any trust or institution registered under section 12AA or section 12AB or to
any fund or institution or trust or any university or other educational institution or any hospital or
other medical institution referred to in sub-clause  ( iv) or sub-clause  ( v) or sub-clause  ( vi) o r
sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of section 10,
shall be deemed to be the income of such person of the previous year,—
(i) in which it is so applied or ceases to be so accumulated or set apart under clause ( a); or
(ii) in which it ceases to remain so invested or deposited under clause ( b); or
(iii) being the last previous year of the period, for which the income is accumulated or set apart but not
utilised for the purpose for which it is so accumulated or set apart under clause ( c); or
(iv) in which it  is credited or  paid to any fund or institution or trust  or any university or  other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution under clause ( d).
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), where due to circumstances beyond the control
of the person in receipt of the income, any income i nvested or deposited in accordance with the provisions
of clause ( b) of sub-section (2) cannot be applied for the purpose for which it was accumulated or set apart,
the Assessing Officer may, on an application made to him in this behalf, allow such person to apply such
income for such other charitable or religious purpose in India  as is specified in the  application by such
person and as is in conformity with the objects of th e trust; and thereupon the provisions of sub-section (3)
shall apply as if the purpose specified by such person in the application under this sub-section were a
purpose specified in the notice given to the Assessing Officer under clause ( a) of sub-section (2):
Provided that the Assessing Officer shall not allow application of such income by way of payment or credit
made for the purposes referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section (3) of section 11:
Provided further that  in  case  the  trust  or  institution,  which  has invested  or  deposited  its income  in
accordance with the provisions of clause ( b) of sub-section (2), is dissolved, the Assessing Officer may allow
application of such income for the purposes referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section (3) in the year in which
such trust or institution was dissolved.
(4) For the purposes of this section "property held under trust" includes a business undertaking so held, and
where a claim is made that the income of any such undertaking shall not be included in the total income of
the persons in receipt thereof, the Assessing Officer shall have power to determine the income of suchundertaking in accordance with the provisions of this Act relating to assessment; and where any income so
determined is in excess of the income as shown in the accounts of the undertaking, such excess shall be
deemed to be applied to purposes other than charitable or religious purposes.
(4A) Sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (3A) shall not apply in relation to
any income of a trust or an institution, being profits and gains of business, unless the business is incidental to
the attainment of the objectives of the trust or, as the case may be, institution, and separate books of account
are maintained by such trust or institution in respect of such business.
(5) The forms and modes of investing or depositing the money referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (2)
shall be the following, namely :—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
111 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(i) investment in savings certificates as defined in clause ( c) of section 2 of the Government Savings
Certificates Act, 1959 (46 of 1959), and any other securities or certificates issued by the CentralGovernment under the Small Savings Schemes of that Government;
(ii) deposit in any account with the Post Office Savings Bank;
(iii) deposit in any account with a scheduled bank or a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the
business  of  banking  (including  a  co-operative  land  mortgage  bank  or  a  co-operative  land
development bank).
Explanation. —In this clause, "scheduled bank" means the State Bank of India constituted under
the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959) , a corresponding new bank constituted under
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of1970), or under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)
Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), or any other bank being a bank included in the Second Schedule to the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
(iv) investment in units of the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963
(52 of 1963);
(v) investment in any security for money created and issued by the Central Government or a State
Government;
(vi) investment in debentures issued by, or on behalf  of, any company or corporation both the principal
whereof  and  the  interest  whereon  are  fully  and  unconditionally  guaranteed  by  the  CentralGovernment or by a State Government;
(vii) investment or deposit in any public sector company:
Provided that where an investment or deposit in any public sector company has been made and
such public sector company ceases to be a public sector company,—
(A) such investment made in the shares of such company shall be deemed to be an investment
made under this clause for a period of thre e years from the date on which such public
sector company ceases to be a public sector company;
(B) such other investment or deposit shall be deemed to be an investment or deposit made
under this clause  for the  period up to the  date  on which such investment  or depositbecomes repayable by such company;
(viii) deposits with or investment in any bonds issued by a financial corporation which is engaged in
providing long-term finance for industrial developm ent in India and which is eligible for deduction
under clause ( viii) of sub-section (1) of section 36;
(ix) deposits with or investment in any bonds issued by a public company formed and registered in
India  with  the  main  object  of  carrying on  the  business  of  providing long-term  finance  forconstruction or purchase  of houses in India  for residential purposes and which is eligible  for
deduction under clause ( viii) of sub-section (1) of section 36;
(ixa) deposits with or investment in any bonds issued by a public company formed and registered in
India with the main object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance for urban
infrastructure in India.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) "long-term finance" means any loan or advance where the terms under which moneys are
loaned or advanced provide for repayment al ong with interest thereof during a period of
not less than five years;
(b) "public company" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the Companies Act,
1956 (1 of 1956);INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
112 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c) "urban infrastructure" means a project for providing potable water supply, sanitation and
sewerage,  drainage,  solid  waste  management,  roads,  bridges  and  flyovers  or  urbantransport;
(x) investment in immovable property.
Explanation. —"Immovable  property"  does  not  include  any  machinery  or  plant  (other  than
machinery or plant installed in a building for the convenient occupation of the building) even
though attached to, or permanently fastened to, anything attached to the earth;
(xi) deposits  with  the  Industrial  Development  Bank  of  India  established  under  the  Industrial
Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964);
(xii) any other form or mode of investment or deposit as may be prescribed.
(6) In this section where any income is required to be  applied or accumulated or set apart for application,
then, for such purposes the income shall be determined without any deduction or allowance by way of
depreciation or otherwise in respect of any asset, acqui sition of which has been claimed as an application of
income under this section in the same or any other previous year.
(7) Where a trust or an institution has been granted registration under section 12AA or section 12AB or has
obtained registration at any time under section 12A [as it stood before its amendment by the Finance (No. 2)
Act, 1996 (33 of 1996)] and the said registration is in force for any previous year, then, nothing contained in
section 10 [
82[other than clause ( 1), clause ( 23C), clause ( 23EA ), clause ( 23EC ), clause ( 23ED ), clause
(46), clause  ( 46A) and clause  ( 46B) ther eof ]] shall operate  to exclude  any income  derived from the
property held under trust from the total income of the person in receipt thereof for that previous year:
Provided  that such registration shall become inoperative from the date on which the trust or institution is
approved under clause ( 23C) of section 10 or 83[is notified under clause ( 23EA ) or clause ( 23EC ) o r
clause ( 23ED ) or clause ( 46)] 84[or clause ( 46A)] of the said section, as the case may be, or the date on
which this proviso has come into force, whichever is later 85[, or, the 1st day of April of the previous year
relevant to the assessment year for which the exemption is claimed under clause ( 46B) of the said section ]:
Provided further  that the trust or institution, whose registration has become inoperative under the first
proviso, may apply to get its registration operative under section 12AA or section 12AB subject to the
condition that on doing so, the approval under clause ( 23C) of section 10 or notification 86[under 85[clause
(23EA ) or] clause ( 23EC ) or 85[clause ( 23ED ) or] clause ( 46) or clause ( 46A)] of the said section, as the
case may be, to such trust or institution shall cease to have any effect from the date on which the said
registration becomes operative and thereafter, it shall not be entitled to exemption under the respective
clauses.
Explanation. —For  the  purposes of  this section,  any  sum payable  by  any  trust  or  institution  shall be
considered  as  application  of  income  in  the  previous  year  in  which  such  sum  is  actually  paid  by  it
(irrespective  of  the  previous year  in  which  the  lia bility  to  pay  such  sum was incurred  by  the  trust  or
institution according to the method of accounting regularly employed by it):
Provided  that where during any previous year, any sum has been claimed to have been applied by the trust
or institution, such sum shall not be allowed as application in any subsequent previous year.

77. Sub. for "before the expiry of the time allowed" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

78. Sub. for "deposit; and" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

79. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
79a. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
113 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

80. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

81. Sub. for "on or before" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

82. Sub. for "other than clause ( 1), clause ( 23C), clause ( 23EC ), clause ( 46) and clause ( 46A) thereof" by
Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Earlier the quoted words were amended by Act No. 08 of 2023,
w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

83. Sub. for "is notified under clause ( 23EC ) or clause ( 46)" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Earlier the quoted words were amended by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

84. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

85. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

86. Sub. for "under clause ( 46)" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.
Income of trusts or institutions from contributions.

12. (1) Any voluntary contributions received by a trust creat ed wholly for charitable or religious purposes or
by an institution established wholly for such purposes ( not being contributions made with a specific direction
that they shall form part of the corpus of the trust or institution) shall for the purposes of section 11 be
deemed to be income derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable or religious purposes and
the provisions of that section and section 13 shall apply accordingly.
(2) The value of any services, being medical or educational services, made available by any charitable or
religious trust running a hospital or medical institution or an educational institution, to any person referred to
in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( cc) or clause ( d) of sub-section (3) of section 13, shall be
deemed to be income of such trust or institution derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable
or religious purposes during the previous year in which such services are so provided and shall be chargeable
to income-tax notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 11.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "value" shall be the value of any benefit
or facility granted or provided free of cost or at c oncessional rate to any person referred to in clause ( a) or
clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( cc) or clause ( d) of sub-section (3) of section 13.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11, any amount of donation received by the trust or
institution in terms of clause ( d) of sub-section (2) of section 80G in respect of which accounts of income
and expenditure have not been rendered to the authority prescribed under clause ( v) of sub-section (5C) of
that  section, in the  manner specified in that  clause, or which has been utilised for purposes other than
providing relief to the victims of earthquake in Gujarat or which remains unut ilised in terms of sub-section
(5C) of section 80G and not transferred to the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund on or before the 31st
day of March, 2004 shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year and shall accordingly be charged
to tax.
Conditions for applicability of sections 11 and 12.

12A.  (1) The provisions of section 11 and section 12 shall not apply in relation to the income of any trust or
institution unless the following conditions are fulf illed, namely:—
(a) the  person  in receipt  of  the  income  has made  an  application  for  registration  of  the  trust  or
institution in the prescribed form and in the prescribed manner to the Principal Commissioner orCommissioner before the 1st day of July, 1973, or before the expiry of a period of one year fromINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
114 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the date of the creation of the trust or the establishment of the institution, whichever is later and
such trust or institution is registered under section 12AA :
Provided  that  where  an application for registration of the  trust  or institution is made  after the
expiry of the period aforesaid, the provisions of se ctions 11 and 12 shall apply in relation to the
income of such trust or institution,—
(i) from the date of the creation of the trust or the establishment of the institution if the
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner is, for reasons to be recorded in writing, satisfied
that the person in receipt of the income wa s prevented from making the application before
the expiry of the period aforesaid for sufficient reasons;
(ii) from the 1st day of the financial year in which the application is made, if the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner is not so satisfied:
Provided further that the provisions of this clause shall not apply in relation to any application
made on or after the 1st day of June, 2007;
(aa) the  person  in receipt  of  the  income  has made  an  application  for  registration  of  the  trust  or
institution on or after the 1st day of June, 2007 in the prescribed form and manner to the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner and such trust or institution is registered under section 12AA;
(ab) the  person  in receipt  of  the  income  has made  an  application  for  registration  of  the  trust  or
institution, in a case where a trust or an institution has been granted registration under section
12AA or has obtained registration at any time under section 12A [as it stood before its amendment
by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996 (33 of 1996)], and, subsequently, it has adopted or undertaken
modifications  of  the  objects  which  do  not  conform to  the  conditions  of  registration,  in  the
prescribed form and manner, within a period of thirty days from the date of said adoption or
modification,  to  the  Principal Commissioner  or  Commissioner  and  such  trust  or  institution  isregistered under section 12AA;
(ac) notwithstanding anything contained in clauses ( a) to ( ab), the person in receipt of the income has
made  an  application  in  the  prescribed  form  and  manner  to  the  Principal  Commissioner  orCommissioner, for registration of the trust or institution,—
(i) where the trust or institution is registered under section 12A [as it stood immediately
before its amendment by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996 (33 of 1996)] or under section12AA [as it  stood immediately before its amendment  by the Taxation and Other Laws
(Relaxation and Amendment of Certain Provisions) Act, 2020 (38 of 2020)], within three
months from the first day of April, 2021;
(ii)where  the  trust  or institution is registered under section 12AB 
87[or  approved  under
sub-clause ( iv) or sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of
section 10] and the period of the said registration 87[or approval, as the case may be,] is
due to expire, at least six months prior to expiry of the said period;
(iii)where the trust or institution has been provisionally registered under section 12AB 87[or
provisionally  approved  under  sub-clause  ( iv)  or  sub-clause  ( v)  or  sub-clause  ( vi) o r
sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of section 10], at least six months prior to expiry of period
of the provisional registration 87[or provisional approval, as the case may be,] or within six
months of commencement of its activities, whichever is earlier;
(iv) where registration of the trust or institution has become inoperative due to the first proviso
to sub-section (7) of section 11, at least six months prior to the commencement of theassessment year from which the said registration is sought to be made operative;
(v) where the trust or institution has adopted or undertaken modifications of the objects which
do not conform to the conditions of registration,  within a period of thirty days from the
date of the said adoption or modification;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
115 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
88[(vi)in any other case, where activities of the trust or institution have—
(A) not commenced, at least one month prior to the commencement of the previous
year relevant to the assessment year from which the said registration is sought;
(B) commenced and no income or part thereof of the said trust or institution has been
excluded from the total income on account of applicab ility of sub-clause ( iv) or
sub-clause ( v) or sub-clause ( vi) or sub-clause ( via) of clause ( 23C) of section 10,
or section 11 or section 12, for any previous year ending on or before the date of
such application, at any time after the commencement of such activities,]
and such trust or institution is registered under section 12AB:
89[Provided that where the application is filed beyond the time allowed in sub-clauses ( i)
to (vi), the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner may, if he considers that there is a
reasonable  cause  for  delay  in  filing  the  application,  c ondone  such  delay  and  such
application shall be deemed to have been filed within time ;]
(b) where the total income of the trust or institution as computed under this Act without giving
effect to the provisions of sections 11 an d 12 exceeds the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to income-tax in any previous year,—
(i) the books of account and other documents have been kept and maintained in such form
and manner and at such place, as may be prescribed; and
(ii) the accounts of the trust or institution for that year have been audited by an accountant
defined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288 before the specified date
referred to in section 44AB and the person in receipt of the income furnishes by that date
the report of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant
and setting forth such particulars, as may be prescribed;
(ba) the person in receipt of the income has furnishe d the return of income for the previous year in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4A) of section 139, within the time allowed under
90[sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of] that section;
(c) [***]
(2) Where an application has been made on or after the 1st day of June, 2007, the provisions of sections 11
and 12 shall apply in relation to the income of such trust or institution from the assessment year immediately
following the financial year in which such application is made:
Provided  that the provisions of sections 11 and 12 shall apply to a trust or institution, where the application
is made under—
(a) sub-clause ( i) of clause ( ac) of sub-section (1), from the assessment year from which such trust or
institution was earlier granted registration;
(b) sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( ac) of sub-section (1), from the first of the assessment year for which it
was provisionally registered.
91[***]
92[***]
93[***]

87. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
116 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

88. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-10-2023.

89. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

90. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

91. Second proviso omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

92. Third proviso omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

93. Fourth proviso omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Procedure for registration.

12AA.  (1) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, on receipt of an application for registration of a
trust or institution made under clause ( a) or clause ( aa) or clause ( ab) of sub-section (1)] of section 12A,
shall—
(a) call for such documents or information from the trust or institution as he thinks necessary in order
to satisfy himself about,—
(i) the genuineness of activities of the trust or institution; and
(ii) the compliance of such requirements of any other law for the time being in force by the
trust or institution as are material for the purpose of achieving its objects,
and may also make such inquiries as he may deem necessary in this behalf; and
(b) after satisfying himself about the objects of the trust or institution and the genuineness of its
activities as required under sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) and compliance of the requirements under
sub-clause ( ii) of the said clause, he—
(i) shall pass an order in writing registering the trust or institution;
(ii) shall, if he is not so satisfied, pass an order in writing refusing to register the trust or
institution,
and a copy of such order shall be sent to the applicant :
Provided  that  no  order  under  sub-clause  ( ii)  shall be  passed  unless  the  applicant  has  been  given  a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(1A) All applications, pending before the Principa l Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner on which no
order has been passed under clause ( b) of sub-section (1) before the 1st day of June, 1999, shall stand
transferred on that day to the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner and the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner may proceed with such applications under th at sub-section from the stage at which they were
on that day.
(2) Every order granting or refusing registration under clause ( b) of sub-section (1) shall be passed before
the expiry of six months from the end of the month in which the application was received under clause ( a) or
clause ( aa) or clause ( ab) of sub-section (1) of section 12A.
(3) Where a trust or an institution has been granted registration under clause ( b) of sub-section (1) or has
obtained registration at any time under section 12A [as it stood before its amendment by the Finance (No. 2)
Act, 1996 (33 of 1996)] and subsequently the Principal Co mmissioner or Commissioner is satisfied that the
activities of such trust or institution are not genuine or are not being carried out in accordance with the
objects of  the  trust  or  institution,  as the  case  may  be,  he  shall pass an  order  in  writing cancelling theregistration of such trust or institution:
Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be passed unless such trust or institution has been given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3 ), where a trust or an institution has been grantedINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
117 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
registration under clause ( b) of sub-section (1) or has obtained registration at any time under section 12A [as
it stood before its amendment by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996 (33 of 1996) and subsequently it is noticed
that—
(a) the activities of the trust or the institution are being carried out in a manner that the provisions of
sections 11 and 12 do not apply to exclude either whole or any part of the income of such trust or
institution due to operation of sub-section (1) of section 13; or
(b) the trust or institution has not complied with the requirement of any other law, as referred to in
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of sub-section (1), and the order, direction or decree, by whatever
name called, holding that such non-compliance has occurred, has either not been disputed or hasattained finality,
then, the Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner may, by an order in writing, cancel the registration of
such trust or institution:
Provided  that the registration shall not be cancelled under this sub-section, if the trust or institution proves
that there was a reasonable cause for the activities to be carried out in the said manner.
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply on or after the 1st day of April, 2021.
Procedure for fresh registration.

12AB.  (1) The Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, on receipt of an application made under clause
(ac) of sub-section (1) of section 12A, shall,—
(a) where the application is made under sub-clause ( i) of the said clause, pass an order in writing
registering the trust or institution for a period of five years;
(b) where  the  application  is made  under  sub-clause  ( ii)  or  sub-clause  ( iii)  or  sub-clause  ( iv) o r
sub-clause ( v) 
94[or item ( B) of sub-clause ( vi)] of the said clause,—
(i) call for such documents or information from the trust or institution or make such inquiries
as he thinks necessary in order to satisfy himself about—
(A) the genuineness of activities of the trust or institution; and
(B) the compliance of such requirements of any other law for the time being in force
by the trust or institution as are material for the purpose of achieving its objects;
(ii) after satisfying himself about the objects of the trust or institution and the genuineness of
its activities under  item ( A)  and  compliance  of  the  requirements under  item ( B),  of
sub-clause ( i),—
(A) pass an order in writing registering the trust or institution for a period of five
years; or
95[(B)if he is not so satisfied, pass an order in writing,--
(I) in a case referred to in sub-clause ( ii) or sub-clause ( iii) or sub-clause ( v)
of  clause  ( ac)  of  sub-section  (1)  of  section  12A  rejecting  such
application and also cancelling its registration;
(II) in a case referred to in sub-clause ( iv) or in item ( B) of sub-clause ( vi) of
sub-section (1) of section 12A, rejecting such application,
after affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard;]
95[(c)where the application is made under item ( A) of sub-clause ( vi) of the said clause or the applicationINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
118 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
is made under sub-clause ( vi) of the said clause, as it stood immediately before its amendment vide
the Finance Act, 2023, pass an order in writing provi sionally registering the trust or institution for a
period of three years from the assessment year from which the registration is sought,]
and send a copy of such order to the trust or institution:
96[Provided  that where an application is made under sub-clauses ( i) to ( v) of the said clause, and the total
income of such trust or institution, without giving effect to the provisions of sections 11 and 12, does notexceed rupees five crores during each of the two prev ious years, preceding the previous year in which such
application is made, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "five years", the
words "ten years" had been substituted. ]
(2) All applications, pending before the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner on which no order has
been passed under clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 12AA before the date on which this section has
come into force, shall be deemed to be applications made under sub-clause ( vi) of clause ( ac) of sub-section
(1) of section 12A on that date.
97[(3) The order under sub-section (1) shall be passed,  in such form and manner as may be prescribed,
within a period of,—
(i) three months calculated from the end of the month in which the application was received in case of
clause ( a);
(ii) six months calculated from the end of the quarter in which the application was received in case of
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( b); and
(iii) one month calculated from the end of the month in which the application was received in case of
clause ( c).]
(4) Where registration or provisional registration of a trust or an institution has been granted under clause ( a)
or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub-section (1) or clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 12AA, as the case
may be, and subsequently,—
(a) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has noticed occurrence of one or more specified
violations during any previous year; or
(b) the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has rece ived a reference from the Assessing Officer
under the second proviso to sub-section (3) of section 143 for any previous year; or
(c) such case has been selected in accordance with the risk management strategy, formulated by the
Board from time to time, for any previous year,
the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner shall,—
(i) call for such documents or information from the trust or institution, or make such inquiry as he
thinks necessary in order to satisfy himself about the occurrence or otherwise of any specified
violation;
(ii) pass an order in writing, cancelling the registration of such trust or institution, after affording a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, for such prev ious year and all subsequent previous years, if
he is satisfied that one or more specified violations have taken place;
(iii) pass an order in writing, refusing to cancel the registration of such trust or institution, if he is not
satisfied about the occurrence of one or more specified violations;
(iv) forward a copy of the order under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii), as the case may be, to the Assessing
Officer and such trust or institution.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the following shall mean "specified violation",—
(a) where any income derived from property held under trust, wholly or in part for charitable or
religious purposes, has been applied, other than for the objects of the trust or institution; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
119 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) the trust or institution has income from profits an d gains of business which is not incidental to the
attainment of its objectives or separate books of account are not maintained by such trust orinstitution in respect of the business which is incidental to the attainment of its objectives; or
(c) the trust or institution has applied any part of its income from the property held under a trust for
private religious purposes, which does not enure for the benefit of the public; or
(d) the  trust  or  institution  established  for  charitable  purpose  created  or  established  after  the
commencement of this Act, has applied any part of its income for the benefit of any particular
religious community or caste; or
(e) any activity being carried out by the trust or institution,—
(i) is not genuine; or
(ii) is not being carried out in accordance with all or any of the conditions subject to which it
was registered; or
(f) the trust or institution has not complied with the re quirement of any other law, as referred to in item
(B) of sub-clause  ( i) of clause  ( b) of  sub-section  (1),  and  the  order,  direction  or  decree, by
whatever  name  called,  holding that  such  non-compliance  has  occurred,  has  either  not  been
disputed or has attained finality 
98[; or]
98[(g) the application referred to in clause ( ac) of sub-section (1) of section 12A 99[***] contains false or
incorrect information.]
(5) The order under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of sub-section (4), as the case may be, shall be passed before
the expiry of a period of six months , calculated from the end of the quarter in which the first notice is issued
by the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, on or after the 1st day of April, 2022, ca lling for any
document or information, or for making any inquiry, under clause ( i) of sub-section (4).

94. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-10-2023.

95. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-10-2023.

96. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

97. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.