8. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

9. Sub. for "such transaction is an international transaction" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
415 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

10. Proviso omtt. by Act No. 07 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .Prior to its omission, proviso, as amended by
Act No. 06 of 2022, w.e.f. 1-4-2022 and Act No. 08 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2024, read as under:
"Provided  that no direction shall be issued after the 31st day of March, 2025."
Power of Board to make safe harbour rules.

92CB. (1) The determination of—
(a) income referred to in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 9; or
(b) arm's length price under section 92C or section 92CA,
shall be subject to safe harbour rules.
(2) The Board may, for the purposes of sub-section (1), make rules for safe harbour.
Explanation. —For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  "safe  harbour"  means  circumstances  in  which  the
income-tax authorities shall accept the transfer price or income, deemed to accrue or arise under clause ( i)
of sub-section (1) of section 9, as the case may be, declared by the assessee.
Advance pricing agreement.

92CC. (1) The Board, with the approval of the Central Government, may enter into an advance pricing
agreement with any person, determining the—
(a) arm's length price or specifying the manner in which the arm's length price is to be determined, in
relation to an international transaction to be entered into by that person;
(b) income referred to in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 9, or specifying the manner in which
said income is to be determined, as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India
by or on behalf of that person, being a non-resident.
(2) The manner of determination of the arm's length price referred to in clause ( a) or the income referred to
in clause ( b) of sub-section (1), may include the methods referred to in sub-section (1) of section 92C or the
methods provided by rules made under this Act, respecti vely, with such adjustments or variations, as may be
necessary or expedient so to do.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 92C  or section 92CA or the methods provided by rules
made under this Act, the arm's length price of any international transaction or the income referred to inclause ( b) of sub-section (1), in respect of which the advance pricing agreement has been entered into, shall
be determined in accordance with the advance pricing agreement so entered.
(4) The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall be valid for such period not exceeding five consecutive
previous years as may be specified in the agreement.
(5) The advance pricing agreement entered into shall be binding—
(a) on the person in whose case, and in respect of th e transaction in relation to which, the agreement
has been entered into; and
(b) on the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, and the income-tax authorities subordinate to
him, in respect of the said person and the said transaction.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
416 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(6) The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be binding if there is a change in law or facts
having bearing on the agreement so entered.
(7) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, by an order, declare an agreement to be
void ab initio , if it finds that the agreement has been obt ained by the person by fraud or misrepresentation of
facts.
(8) Upon declaring the agreement void ab initio ,—
(a) all the provisions of the Act shall apply to the person as if such agreement had never been entered
into; and
(b) notwithstanding anything contained  in  the  Act,  for  the  purpose  of  computing any  period  of
limitation under this Act, the period beginning with the date of such agreement and ending on the
date of order under sub-section (7) shall be excluded:
Provided  that  where  immediately  after  the  exclusion  of  the  aforesaid  period,  the  period  of  limitation,
referred to in any provision of this Act, is less than sixty days, such remaining period shall be extended tosixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly.
(9) The Board may, for the purposes of this section, pr escribe a scheme specifying therein the manner, form,
procedure and any other matter generally in respect of the advance pricing agreement.
(9A) The agreement referred to in sub-section (1), may, subject to such conditions, procedure and manner as
may be prescribed, provide for determining the—
(a) arm's length price or specify the manner in which the arm's length price shall be determined in
relation to the international transaction entered into by the person;
(b) income referred to in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 9, or specifying the manner in which
the said income is to be determined, as is reas onably attributable to the operations carried out in
India by or on behalf of that person, being a non-resident,
during any period not exceeding four previous years preceding the first of the previous years referred to in
sub-section (4), and the arm's length price of such international transaction or the income of such personshall be determined in accordance with the said agreement.
(10) Where an application is made by a person for entering into an agreement referred to in sub-section (1),
the proceeding shall be deemed to be pending in the case of the person for the purposes of the Act.
Effect to advance pricing agreement.

92CD. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 139, where any person has entered
into an agreement and prior to the date of entering into the agreement, any return of income has been
furnished under the provisions of section 139 for any assessment year relevant to a previous year to whichsuch agreement applies, such person shall furnish, within  a period of three months from the end of the month
in which the  said agreement  was entered into, a  modified return in accordance  with and limited to the
agreement.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, all other provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly as if
the modified return is a return furnished under section 139.
(3) If the assessment or reassessment proceedings for an assessment year relevant to a previous year to
which the agreement applies have been completed before the expiry of period allowed for furnishing of
modified return under sub-section (1), the Assessing Offi cer shall, in a case where modified return is filed in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), pass an order modifying the total income of the relevant
assessment year determined in such assessment or reassessment, as the case may be, having regard to and inINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
417 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
accordance with the agreement.
(4) Where the assessment or reassessment proceedings fo r an assessment year relevant to the previous year
to which the agreement applies are pending on the date of filing of modified return in accordance with the
provisions  of  sub-section  (1),  the  Assessing  Officer  shall  proceed  to  complete  the  assessment  or
reassessment proceedings in accordance with the agreement taking into consideration the modified return sofurnished.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 153 or section 153B or section 144C,—
(a) the order under sub-section (3) shall be passed wi thin a period of one year from the end of the
financial year in which the modified return under sub-section (1) is furnished;
(b) the period of limitation as provided in section 153 or section 153B or section 144C for completion
of pending assessment or reassessment proceedings referred to in sub-section (4) shall be extendedby a period of twelve months.
(6) For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "agreement" means an agreement referred to in sub-section (1) of section 92CC;
(ii) the assessment or reassessment proceedings for an assessment year shall be deemed to have been
completed where—
(a) an assessment or reassessment order has been passed; or
(b) no notice  has been issued under sub-section (2) of section 143 till the  expiry of the
limitation period provided under the said section.
Secondary adjustment in certain cases.

92CE. (1) Where a primary adjustment to transfer price,—
(i) has been made suo motu by the assessee in his return of income;
(ii) made by the Assessing Officer has been accepted by the assessee;
(iii) is determined by an advance pricing agreement entered into by the assessee under section 92CC,
on or after the 1st day of April, 2017;
(iv) is made as per the safe harbour rules framed under section 92CB; or
(v) is arising as a result of resolution of an assessment by way of the mutual agreement procedure
under an agreement entered into under section 90 or section 90A for avoidance of double taxation,
the assessee shall make a secondary adjustment:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply, if,—
(i) the amount of primary adjustment made in any previous year does not exceed one crore rupees; or
(ii) the primary adjustment is made in respect of an assessment year commencing on or before the 1st
day of April, 2016:
Provided further  that no refund of taxes paid, if any, by virtue of provisions of this sub-section as they
stood immediately before their amendment by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019 shall be claimed and allowed.
(2) Where, as a result of primary adjustment to the tran sfer price, there is an increase in the total income or
reduction in the loss, as the case may be, of the assessee, the excess money or part thereof, as the case may
be, which is available with its associated enterprise, if not repatriated to India within the time as may beprescribed, shall be deemed to be an advance made by the assessee to such associated enterprise and the
interest on such advance, shall be computed in such manner as may be prescribed.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
418 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarifie d that the excess money or part thereof may be
repatriated from any of the associated enterprises of the assessee which is not a resident in India.
(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), where the excess money or part thereof has not
been repatriated within the prescribed time, the assessee may, at his option, pay additional income-tax at the
rate of eighteen per cent on such excess money or part thereof, as the case may be.
(2B) The tax on the excess money or part thereof so paid by the assessee under sub-section (2A) shall be
treated as the final payment of tax in respect of the excess money or part thereof not repatriated and no
further credit therefor shall be claimed by the assesse e or by any other person in respect of the amount of
tax so paid.
(2C) No deduction under any other provision of this Act shall be allowed to the assessee in respect of the
amount on which tax has been paid in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2A).
(2D) Where the additional income-tax referred to in sub-section (2A) is paid by the assessee, he shall not be
required to make secondary adjustment under sub-section (1) and compute interest under sub-section (2)
from the date of payment of such tax.
(3) For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "associated enterprise" shall have the meaning assigned to it in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2)
of section 92A;
(ii) "arm's length price" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( ii) of section 92F;
(iii) "excess money"  means the  difference  between  the  arm's  length  price  determined  in  primary
adjustment and the price at which the international transaction has actually been undertaken;
(iv) "primary adjustment" to a transfer price, means the determination of transfer price in accordance
with the arm's length principle resulting in an increase in the total income or reduction in the loss,
as the case may be, of the assessee;
(v) "secondary adjustment" means an adjustment in the books of account of the assessee and its
associated enterprise to reflect that the actual allocation of profits between the assessee and its
associated enterprise  are consistent with the transfer price determined as a result of primaryadjustment,  thereby  removing the  imbalance  between  cash  account  and  actual profit  of  the
assessee.
Maintenance, keeping and furnishing of information and document by certain persons.

92D. (1) Every person,—
(i) who has entered into an international transactio n or specified domestic transaction shall keep and
maintain such information and document in respect thereof as may be prescribed;
(ii) being a constituent entity of an international group, shall keep and maintain such information and
document in respect of an international group as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,—
(A) "constituent entity" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) of sub-section (9) of section
286;
(B) "international group" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( g) of sub-section (9) of
section 286.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in s ub-section (1), the Board may prescribe the period for
which the information and document shall be kept and maintained under the said sub-section.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
419 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(3) The Assessing Officer or the Commissioner (Appeals) may, in the course of any proceeding under this
Act, require any person referred to in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) to furnish any information or document
referred therein, within a period of 11[ten] days from the date of receipt of a notice issued in this regard:
Provided  that the Assessing Officer or the Commissioner (Appeals) may, on an application made by such
person, extend the period of 11 [ten] days by a further period not exceeding thirty days.
(4) The person referred to in clause ( ii) of sub-section (1) shall furnish the information and document
referred therein to the authority prescribed under s ub-section (1) of section 286, in such manner, on or
before such date, as may be prescribed.

11. Sub. for "thirty" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Report from an accountant to be furnished by persons entering into international transaction or
specified domestic transaction.

92E. Every person who has entered into an international transaction or specified domestic transaction during
a previous year shall obtain a report from an accountant and furnish such report on or before the specified
date in the prescribed form duly signed and verified in the prescribed manner by such accountant and settingforth such particulars as may be prescribed.
Definitions of certain terms relevant to computation of arm's length price, etc.

92F. In sections 92, 92A, 92B, 92C, 92D and 92E, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "accountant" shall have the same meaning as in the Explanation  below sub-section (2) of section
288;
(ii) "arm's length price" means a price which is applied or proposed to be applied in a transaction
between persons other than associated enterprises, in uncontrolled conditions;
(iii) "enterprise" means a person (including a permanent establishment of such person) who is, or has
been, or is proposed to be, engaged in any activity, relating to the production, storage, supply,
distribution, acquisition or control of articles or goods, or know-how, patents, copyrights, trade-
marks, licences, franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, or anydata, documentation, drawing or specification relating to any patent, invention, model, design,secret formula or process, of which the other ente rprise is the owner or in respect of which the
other enterprise has exclusive rights, or the provision  of services of any kind, or in carrying out any
work in pursuance of a contract, or in investment, or providing loan or in the business of acquiring,holding, underwriting or dealing with shares, debentures or other securities of any other body
corporate, whether such activity or business is carried on, directly or through one or more of its
units or divisions or subsidiaries, or whether such unit or division or subsidiary is located at thesame place where the enterprise is located or at a different place or places;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
420 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iiia) "permanent establishment", referred to in clause ( iii), includes a fixed place of business through
which the business of the enterprise is wholly or partly carried on;
(iv) "specified date" means the date one month prior to the due date for furnishing the return of income
under sub-section (1) of section 139 for the relevant assessment year;
(v) "transaction" includes an arrangement, understanding or action in concert,—
(A) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is formal or in writing; or
(B) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is intended to be enforceable by
legal proceeding.
Avoidance of income-tax by transactions resulting in transfer of income to non-residents.

93.  (1)  Where  there  is a  transfer  of  assets by  virtue  or  in  consequence  whereof,  either  alone  or  in
conjunction with associated operations, any income  becomes payable  to a  non-resident, the  following
provisions shall apply—
(a) where any person has, by means of any such transf er, either alone or in conjunction with associated
operations, acquired any rights by virtue of which he has, within the meaning of this section, powerto enjoy, whether forthwith or in the future, any income of a non-resident person which, if it were
income  of  the  first-mentioned  person,  would  be  chargeable  to  income-tax,  that  income  shall,
whether it would or would not have been chargeable to income-tax apart from the provisions of thissection, be deemed to be income of the first-mentioned person for all the purposes of this Act;
(b) where, whether before or after any such transfer, any such first-mentioned person receives or is
entitled to receive any capital sum the payment whereof is in any way connected with the transferor any associated operations, then any income which, by virtue or in consequence of the transfer,
either alone or in conjunction with associated operations, has become the income of a non-resident
shall, whether it would or would not have been chargeable to income-tax apart from the provisionsof this section, be deemed to be the income of  the first-mentioned person for all the purposes of
this Act.
Explanation. —The  provisions of this sub-section shall apply also in relation to transfers of assets and
associated operations carried out before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Where any person has been charged to income-tax on any income deemed to be his under the provisions
of this section and that income is subsequently received by him, whether as income or in any other form, itshall not again be deemed to form part of his income for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply if the first-mentioned person in sub-section (1) shows to the
satisfaction of the Assessing Officer that—
(a) neither the transfer nor any associated operation had for its purpose or for one of its purposes the
avoidance of liability to taxation; or
(b) the transfer and all associated operations were bona fide  commercial transactions and were not
designed for the purpose of avoiding liability to taxation.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) references to assets representing any assets, income or accumulations of income include references
to shares in or obligation of any company to which, or obligation of any other person to whom,those assets, that income or those accumulations are or have been transferred;
(b) any body corporate incorporated outside India shall be treated as if it were a non-resident;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
421 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c) a person shall be deemed to have power to enjoy the income of a non-resident if—
(i) the income is in fact so dealt with by any person as to be calculated at some point of time
and, whether in the form of income or not, to enure for the benefit of the first-mentioned
person in sub-section (1), or
(ii) the receipt or accrual of the income operates to increase the value to such first-mentioned
person of any assets held by him or for his benefit, or
(iii) such first-mentioned person receives or is entitled to receive at any time  any benefit
provided or to be provided out of that inco me or out of moneys which are or will be
available for the purpose by reason of the effect or successive effects of the associated
operations on that income and assets which represent that income, or
(iv) such  first-mentioned  person  has  power  by  means  of  the  exercise  of  any  power  of
appointment or power of revocation or otherwise to obtain for himself, whether with or
without the consent of any other person, the beneficial enjoyment of the income, or
(v) such first-mentioned person is able, in any manner whatsoever and whether directly or
indirectly, to control the application of the income;
(d) in determining whether a person has power to enjoy income, regard shall be had to the substantial
result and effect of the transfer and any associated operations, and all benefits which may at anytime accrue to such person as a result of the tr ansfer and any associated operations shall be taken
into account irrespective of the nature or form of the benefits.
(4) ( a) "Assets" includes property or rights of any kind an d "transfer" in relation to rights includes the
creation of those rights ;
(b) "associated operation", in relation to any transfer, means an operation of any kind effected by any person
in relation to—
(i) any of the assets transferred, or
(ii) any assets representing, whether directly or indirectly, any of the assets transferred, or
(iii) the income arising from any such assets, or
(iv) any assets representing, whether directly or indirectly, the accumulations of income arising from
any such assets ;
(c) "benefit" includes a payment of any kind ;
(d) "capital sum" means—
(i) any sum paid or payable by way of a loan or repayment of a loan ; and
(ii) any other sum paid or payable otherwise than as income, being a sum which is not paid or payable
for full consideration in money or money's worth.
Avoidance of tax by certain transactions in securities.

94. (1) Where the owner of any securities (in this sub-section and in sub-section (2) referred to as "the
owner") sells or transfers those securities, and buys back or reacquires the securities, then, if the result of the
transaction is that any interest becoming payable in re spect of the securities is receivable otherwise than by
the owner, the interest payable as aforesaid shall, wh ether it would or would not have been chargeable to
income-tax apart from the provisions of this sub-secti on, be deemed, for all the purposes of this Act, to be
the income of the owner and not to be the income of any other person.
Explanation. —The  references in this sub-section to buying back or reacquiring the  securities shall beINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
422 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
deemed to include references to buying or acquiring s imilar securities,  so,  however,  that  where  similar
securities are bought or acquired, the owner shall be under no greater liab ility to income-tax than he would
have been under if the original securities had been bought back or reacquired.
(2) Where any person has had at any time during any previous year any beneficial interest in any securities,
and the result of any transaction relating to such securities or the income thereof is that, in respect of suchsecurities within such year, either no income is recei ved by him or the income received by him is less than
the sum to which the income would have amounted if the income from such securities had accrued from day
to day and been apportioned accordingly, then the in come from such securities for such year shall be
deemed to be the income of such person.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not apply if the owner, or the person who has
had a beneficial interest in the securities, as the ca se may be, proves to the satisfaction of the Assessing
Officer—
(a) that there has been no avoidance of income-tax, or
(b) that the avoidance of income-tax was exceptional and not systematic and that there was not in his
case in any of the three preceding years any avoida nce of income-tax by a transaction of the nature
referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2).
(4) Where any person carrying on a business which consists  wholly or partly in dealing in securities, buys or
acquires any securities and sells back or retransfers the securities, then, if the result of the transaction is that
interest becoming payable in respect of the securities is receivable by him but is not deemed to be his
income by reason of the provisions contained in sub-sect ion (1), no account shall be taken of the transaction
in computing for any of the purposes of this Act the profits arising from or loss sustained in the business.
(5) Sub-section (4) shall have effect, subject to any necessary modifications, as if references to selling back
or retransferring the securities included references to selling or transferring similar securities.
(6) The Assessing Officer may, by notice in writing, requi re any person to furnish him within such time as he
may direct (not being less than twenty-eight days), in respect of all securities of which such person was the
owner or in which he had a beneficial interest at any time during the period specified in the notice, such
particulars as he considers necessary for the purposes  of this section and for the purpose of discovering
whether income-tax has been borne in respect of the interest on all those securities.
(7) Where—
(a) any person buys or acquires any securities or unit within a period of three months prior to the
record date;
(b) such person sells or transfers—
(i) such securities within a period of three months after such date; or
(ii) such unit within a period of nine months after such date;
(c) the dividend or income on such securities or unit received or receivable by such person is exempt,
then, the loss, if any, arising to him on account of such  purchase and sale of securities or unit, to the extent
such loss does not exceed the amount of dividend or income received or receivable on such securities or
unit, shall be ignored for the purposes of computing his income chargeable to tax.
(8) Where—
(a) any person buys or acquires any securities or units within a period of three months prior to the
record date;
(b) such person is allotted additional securities or units without any payment on the basis of holding of
such securities or units on such date;
(c) such person sells or transfers all or any of the securities or units referred to in clause ( a) within a
period of  nine  months after such date, while  continuing to hold all or any of  the  additional
securities or units referred to in clause ( b),INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
423 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
then, the loss, if any, arising to him on account of such purchase and sale of all or any of such securities or
units shall be ignored for the purposes of computin g his income chargeable to tax and notwithstanding
anything contained in any other provision of this Act,  the amount of loss so ignored shall be deemed to be
the cost of purchase or acquisition of such additional securities or units referred to in clause ( b) as are held
by him on the date of such sale or transfer.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "interest" includes a dividend ;
(aa) "record date" means such date as may be fixed by—
(i) a company;
(ii) a Mutual Fund or the Administrator of the specified undertaking or the specified company
referred to in the Explanation  to clause ( 35) of section 10; or
(iii) a business trust defined in clause ( 13A) of section 2; or
(iv) an Alternative Investment Fund defined in clause ( b) of sub-regulation (1) of regulation 2
of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (Alternative  Investment  Funds)
Regulations, 2012, made under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15
of 1992),
for the purposes of entitlement of the holder of the se curities or units, as the case may be, to receive
dividend, income, or additional securities or units without any consideration, as the case may be;
(b) "securities" includes stocks and shares ;
(c) securities shall be deemed to be similar if they entitle their holders to the same rights against the
same persons as to capital and interest and the same remedies for the enforcement of those rights,
notwithstanding any difference in the total nominal amounts of the respective securities or in the
form in which they are held or in the manner in which they can be transferred;
(d) "unit" shall mean,—
(i) a unit of a business trust defined in clause ( 13A) of section 2;
(ii) a unit defined in clause ( b) of the Explanation  to section 115AB; or
(iii) beneficial interest of an investor in an Alternative Investment Fund, defined in clause ( b)
of  sub-regulation  (1)  of  regulation  2  of  the  Securities and  Exchange  Board  of  India
(Alternative  Investment  Funds)  Regulations,  2012,  made  under  the  Securities  andExchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), and shall include shares or partnership
interests.
Special measures in respect of transactions with persons located in notified jurisdictional area.

94A. (1) The Central Government may, having regard to the lack of effective exchange of information with
any country or territory outside India, specify by notificat ion in the Official Gazette such country or territory
as a notified jurisdictional area in relation to transactions entered into by any assessee.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in  this Act, if an assessee enters into a transaction
where one of the parties to the transaction is a person located in a notified jurisdictional area, then—
(i) all the parties to the transaction shall be deemed to be associated enterprises within the meaning of
section 92A;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
424 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) any transaction in the  nature  of purchase, sale  or lease  of tangible  or intangible  property or
provision of service or lending or borrowing m oney or any other transaction having a bearing on
the profits, income, losses or assets of the assessee including a mutual agreement or arrangement
for allocation or apportionment of, or any contribut ion to, any cost or expense incurred or to be
incurred in connection with a benefit, service or fac ility provided or to be provided by or to the
assessee shall be deemed to be an international transaction within the meaning of section 92B,
and the provisions of sections 92, 92A, 92B, 92C [exc ept the second proviso to sub-section (2)], 92CA,
92CB, 92D, 92E and 92F shall apply accordingly.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, no deduction,—
(a) in respect of any payment made to any financial institution located in a notified jurisdictional area
shall be allowed under this Act, unless the assessee furnishes an authorisation in the prescribed
form authorising the Board or any other income-tax  authority acting on its behalf to seek relevant
information from the said financial institution on behalf of such assessee; and
(b) in  respect  of  any  other  expenditure  or  allowance  (including  depreciation)  arising  from  the
transaction with a person located in a notified jurisdictional area shall be allowed under any other
provision of this Act, unless the  assessee  maintains such other documents and furnishes suchinformation as may be prescribed, in this behalf.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, where, in any previous year, the assessee
has received or credited any sum from any person located in a notified jurisdictional area and the assessee
does not offer any explanation about the source of the said sum in the hands of such person or in the hands
of the beneficial owner (if such person is not the beneficial owner of the said sum) or the explanationoffered by the assessee, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, is not satisfactory, then, such sum shall be
deemed to be the income of the assessee for that previous year.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provi sions of this Act, where any person located in a
notified jurisdictional area is entitled to receive any sum or income or amount on which tax is deductibleunder Chapter XVII-B, the tax shall be deducted at the highest of the following rates, namely:—
(a) at the rate or rates in force;
(b) at the rate specified in the relevant provisions of this Act;
(c) at the rate of thirty per cent.
(6) In this section,—
(i) "person located in a notified jurisdictional area" shall include,—
(a) a person who is resident of the notified jurisdictional area;
(b) a person, not being an individual, which is established in the notified jurisdictional area; or
(c) a permanent establishment of a person not falling in sub-clause ( a) or sub-clause ( b), in the
notified jurisdictional area;
(ii) "permanent establishment" shall have the same meaning as defined in clause ( iiia) of section 92F;
(iii) "transaction" shall have the same meaning as defined in clause ( v) of section 92F.
Limitation on interest deduction in certain cases.

94B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where an Indian com- pany, or a permanent
establishment of a foreign company in India, being the borrower, incurs any expenditure by way of interest
or of similar nature exceeding one crore rupees which is deductible in computing income chargeable underINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
425 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" in respect of any debt issued by a non-resident, bein g
an associated enterprise of such borrower, the interest shall not be deductible in computation of income
under the said head to the extent that it arises from excess interest, as specified in sub-section (2) :
Provided that where the debt is issued by a lender which is not associated but an associated enterprise either
provides an implicit or explicit guarantee to such lender or deposits a corresponding and matching amount offunds with the lender, such debt shall be deemed to have been issued by an associated enterprise.
(1A) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to interest paid in respect of a debt issued by a lender
which is a permanent establishment in India of a non- resident, being a person engaged in the business of
banking.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the excess interest shall mean an amount of total interest paid or
payable in excess of thirty per cent of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation of the
borrower in the previous year or interest paid or paya ble to associated enterprises for that previous year,
whichever is less.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to an Indian company or a permanent establishment of a
foreign company which is engaged in the business of banking or insurance 
12[or  a Finance  Company
located  in  any  International  Financial  Services  Centre, ] 13[or  such  class  of  non-banking  financial
companies as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf].
(4) Where for any assessment year, the interest expenditure is not wholly deducted against income under the
head "Profits and gains of business or profession", so much of the interest expenditure as has not been so
deducted, shall be carried forward to the following assessment year or assessment years, and it shall beallowed as a deduction against the profits and gains, if an y, of any business or profession carried on by it and
assessable for that assessment year to the extent of maximum allowable interest expenditure in accordance
with sub-section (2):
Provided that no interest expenditure shall be carried forward under this sub-section for more than eight
assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year for which the excess interest expenditure was
first computed.
(5) For the purposes of this section, the expressions—
(i) "associated enterprise" shall have the meaning assigned to it in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2)
of section 92A;
(ii) "debt" means any loan, financial instrument, finance lease, financial derivative, or any arrangement
that gives rise to interest, discounts or other finance charges that are deductible in the computation
of income chargeable under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession";
14[(iia)"non-banking financial company"  shall have  the  meaning assigned to it  in clause  ( vii) of the
Explanation  to clause ( viia) of sub-section (1) of section 36;]
(iii) "permanent establishment" includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the
enterprise is wholly or partly carried on;
15[(iv)"Finance Company" means a finance company as defined in clause ( e) of sub-regulation (1) of
regulation  2  of  the  International  Financial  Services  Centres  Authority  (Finance  Company)
Regulations, 2021 made under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019(50 of  2019) and which  satisfies such conditions and carries on such activities,  as may  beprescribed;
(v) "International Financial Services Centre" shall have the meaning as assigned to it in clause ( q) of
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005). ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
426 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

12. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

13. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

14. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023 w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

15. Clauses (iv) and (v) Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.
CHAPTER X-A
GENERAL ANTI-A VOIDANCE RULE
Applicability of General Anti-Avoidance Rule.

95. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act, an arrangement entered into by an assessee may be
declared to be an impermissible avoidance arrangement and the consequence in relation to tax arising
therefrom may be determined subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) This Chapter shall apply in respect of any assessm ent year beginning on or after the 1st day of April,

2018.
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this Chapter may be
applied to any step in, or a part of, the arrangement as they are applicable to the arrangement.
Impermissible avoidance arrangement.

96. (1)An impermissible avoidance arrangement means an arrangement, the main purpose of which is to
obtain a tax benefit, and it—
(a) creates rights, or obligations, which are not ordinarily created between persons dealing at arm's
length;
(b) results, directly or indirectly, in the misuse, or abuse, of the provisions of this Act;
(c) lacks commercial substance or is deemed to lack commercial substance under section 97, in whole
or in part; or
(d) is entered into, or carried out, by means, or in a manner, which are not ordinarily employed for
bona fide purposes.
(2) An arrangement shall be presumed, unless it is pr oved to the contrary by the assessee, to have been
entered into, or carried out, for the main purpose of obtai ning a tax benefit, if the main purpose of a step in,
or a part of, the arrangement is to obtain a tax benefit,  notwithstanding the fact that the main purpose of the
whole arrangement is not to obtain a tax benefit.
Arrangement to lack commercial substance.

97. (1) An arrangement shall be deemed to lack commercial substance, if—
(a) the substance or effect of the arrangement as a whole, is inconsistent with, or differs significantlyINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
427 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
from, the form of its individual steps or a part; or
(b) it involves or includes—
(i) round trip financing;
(ii) an accommodating party;
(iii) elements that have effect of offsetting or cancelling each other; or
(iv) a transaction which is conducted through one or more persons and disguises the value,
location,  source,  ownership  or  control of  funds which  is the  subject  matter  of  such
transaction; or
(c) it involves the location of an asset or of a transa ction or of the place of residence of any party
which is without any substantial commercial purpose other than obtaining a tax benefit (but for the
provisions of this Chapter) for a party; or
(d) it does not have a significant effect upon the business risks or net cash flows of any party to the
arrangement apart from any effect attributable to the tax benefit that would be obtained (but for
the provisions of this Chapter).
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) , round trip financing includes any arrangement in which, through a
series of transactions—
(a) funds are transferred among the parties to the arrangement; and
(b) such transactions do not have any substantial commercial purpose other than obtaining the tax
benefit (but for the provisions of this Chapter),
without having any regard to—
(A) whether or not the funds involved in the round trip  financing can be traced to any funds transferred
to, or received by, any party in connection with the arrangement;
(B) the time, or sequence, in which the funds involve d in the round trip financing are transferred or
received; or
(C) the means by, or manner in, or mode through, wh ich funds involved in the round trip financing are
transferred or received.
(3) For the purposes of this Chapter, a party to an a rrangement shall be an accommodating party, if the main
purpose of the direct or indirect participation of that party in the arrangement, in whole or in part, is to
obtain, directly or indirectly, a tax benefit (but for the provisions of this Chapter) for the assessee whether or
not the party is a connected person in relation to any party to the arrangement.
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the following may be relevant but shall not be
sufficient for determining whether an arrangement lacks commercial substance or not, namely:—
(i) the period or time for which the arrangement (including operations therein) exists;
(ii) the fact of payment of taxes, directly or indirectly, under the arrangement;
(iii) the fact that an exit route (including transfer of any activity or business or operations) is provided
by the arrangement.
Consequences of impermissible avoidance arrangement.

98. (1) If an arrangement is declared to be an impermissible avoidance arrangement, then, the consequences,
in relation to tax, of the arrangement, including deni al of tax benefit or a benefit under a tax treaty, shall be
determined, in such manner as is deemed appropriate, in the circumstances of the case, including by way of
but not limited to the following, namely:—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
428 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) disregarding, combining or recharacterising any step in, or a part or whole of, the impermissible
avoidance arrangement;
(b) treating the impermissible avoidance arrangement as if it had not been entered into or carried out;
(c) disregarding any accommodating party or treating any accommodating party and any other party as
one and the same person;
(d) deeming persons who are connected persons in relation to each other to be one and the same
person for the purposes of determining tax treatment of any amount;
(e) reallocating amongst the parties to the arrangement—
(i) any accrual, or receipt, of a capital nature or revenue nature; or
(ii) any expenditure, deduction, relief or rebate;
(f)t r e a t i n g —
(i) the place of residence of any party to the arrangement; or
(ii) the situs of an asset or of a transaction,
at a place other than the place of residence, location of the asset or location of the transaction as
provided under the arrangement; or
(g) considering or looking through any arrangement by disregarding any corporate structure.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) ,—
(i) any equity may be treated as debt or vice versa;
(ii) any accrual, or receipt, of a capital nature may be treated as of revenue nature or vice versa; or
(iii) any expenditure, deduction, relief or rebate may be recharacterised.
T reatment of connected person and accommodating party.

99. For the purposes of this Chapter, in determining whether a tax benefit exists,—
(i) the parties who are connected persons in relation to each other may be treated as one and the same
person;
(ii) any accommodating party may be disregarded;
(iii) the accommodating party and any other party may be treated as one and the same person;
(iv) the arrangement may be considered or looked through by disregarding any corporate structure.
Application of this Chapter.

100. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply in addition  to, or in lieu of, any other basis for determination
of tax liability.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
429 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Framin g of guidelines .

101. The provisions of this Chapter shall be applied in accordance with such guidelines and subject to such
conditions, as may be prescribed.
Definitions.

102. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "arrangement" means any step in, or a  part  or whole  of, any transaction, operation, scheme,
agreement  or  understanding,  whether  enforceable  or  not,  and  includes  the  alienation  of  any
property in such transaction, operation, scheme, agreement or understanding;
(2) "asset" includes property, or right, of any kind;
(3) "benefit" includes a payment of any kind whether in tangible or intangible form;
(4) "connected person" means any person who is connected directly or indirectly to another person
and includes,—
(a) any relative of the person, if such person is an individual;
(b) any director of the company or any relative of such director, if the person is a company;
(c) any partner or member of a firm or association of persons or body of individuals or any
relative of such partner or member, if the pers on is a firm or association of persons or body
of individuals;
(d) any member of the Hindu undivided fa mily or any relative of such member, if the person is
a Hindu undivided fa mily;
(e) any individual who has a substantial interest in  the business of the person or any relative of
such individual;
(f) a  company,  firm  or  an  association  of  persons  or  a  body  of  individuals,  whether
incorporated or not, or a  Hindu undivided fa mily  having a  substantial interest  in  the
business of  the  person or  any  director,  partner, or  member  of  the  company,  firm or
association of persons or body of individuals or fa mily, or any relative of such director,
partner or member;
(g) a company, firm or association of persons or body of individuals, whether incorporated or
not, or a Hindu undivided fa mily, whose director, partner, or member has a substantial
interest in the business of the person, or family or any relative of such director, partner ormember;
(h) any other person who carries on a business, if—
(i) the person being an individual, or any relative of such person, has a substantial
interest in the business of that other person; or
(ii) the person being a company, firm, association of persons, body of individuals,
whether incorporated or not, or a Hindu undivided fa mily, or any director, partner
or member of such company, firm or a ssociation of persons or body of individuals
or family, or any relative of such director, partner or member, has a substantial
interest in the business of that other person;
(5) "fund" includes—
(a) any cash;
(b) cash equivalents; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
430 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c) any right, or obligation, to receive or pay, the cash or cash equivalent;
(6) "party" includes a person or a permanent establishment which participates or takes part in an
arrangement;
(7) "relative" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Explanation to clause ( vi) of sub-section (2)
of section 56;
(8) a person shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in the business, if,—
(a) in a case where the business is carried on by a company, such person is, at any time during
the financial year, the beneficial owner of equity shares carrying twenty per cent or more,of the voting power; or
(b) in any other case, such person is, at any time during the financial year, beneficially entitled
to twenty per cent or more, of the profits of such business;
(9) "step" includes a measure or an action, particularly  one of a series taken in order to deal with or
achieve a particular thing or object in the arrangement;
(10) "tax benefit" includes,—
(a) a reduction or avoidance or deferral of tax or other amount payable under this Act; or
(b) an increase in a refund of tax or other amount under this Act; or
(c) a reduction or avoidance or deferral of tax or other amount that would be payable under
this Act, as a result of a tax treaty; or
(d) an increase in a refund of tax or other amount under this Act as a result of a tax treaty; or
(e) a reduction in total income; or
(f) an increase in loss,
in the relevant previous year or any other previous year;
(11) "tax treaty" means an agreement referred to in sub-section (1)of section 90 or sub-section (1)of
section 90A.
CHAPTER XI
ADDITIONAL INCOME-TAX ON UNDISTRIBUTED PROFITS
[Chapter XI omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1988. While sections 95 to 103 were omitted by
the Finance Act, 1965, w .e.f. 1-4-1965, sections 104 to 109 were omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w.e.f.
1-4-1988. ]
Income-tax on undistributed income of certain companies.

104. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Special provisions for certain companies.

105. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1988. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
431 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Period of limitation for making orders under section 104.

106. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Approval of Inspecting Assistant Commissioner for orders under section 104.

107. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Reduction of minimum distribution in certain cases.

107A. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. Original section was inserted by the Finance
Act, 1964, w .e.f. 1-4-1964. ]
Savings for company in which public are substantially interested.

108. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
"Distributable income", "investment company" and "statutory percentage" defined.

109. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
CHAPTER XII
DETERMINATION OF TAX IN CERTAIN SPECIAL CASES
Determination of tax where total income includes income on which no tax is payable.

110. Where there is included in the total income of an assessee any income on which no income-tax is
payable under the provisions of this Act, the assessee shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of
income-tax with which he is chargeable on his total income, of an amount equal to the income-tax calculatedat the average rate of income-tax on the amount on which no income-tax is payable.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
432 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
T ax on accumulated balance of recognised provident fund.

111. (1) Where the accumulated balance due to an employe e participating in a recognised provident fund is
included in his total income, owing to the provisions of rule 8 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule not beingapplicable, the Assessing Officer shall calculate the total of the various sums of tax in accordance with the
provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule 9 thereof.
(2) Where the accumulated balance due to an employee participating in a recognised provident fund which
is not included in his total income under the provisions of rule 8 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule becomespayable, super-tax shall be calculated in the manner provided in sub-rule (2) of rule 9 thereof.
T ax on short-term capital gains in certain cases.

111A.  (1) Where the total income of an assessee includes any income chargeable under the head "Capital
gains", arising from the transfer of a short-term capital asset, being an equity share in a company or a unit of
an equity oriented fund or a unit of a business trust and—
(a) the transaction of sale of such equity share or unit is entered into on or after the date on which
Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004 comes into force; and
(b) such transaction is chargeable to securities transaction tax under that Chapter,
16[the tax payable by the assessee on the total income shall be the aggregate of—
(i) the amount of income-tax calculated on such short-term capital gains—
(a) at the rate of fifteen per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd day of
July, 2024; and
(b) at the rate of twenty per cent for any transfer  which takes place on or after the 23rd day of
July, 2024;
(ii) the amount of income-tax payable on the balance amount of the total income as if such balance
amount were the total income of the assessee:]
Provided  that in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, being a resident, where the total
income as reduced by such short-term capital gains is below the maximum amount which is not chargeableto income-tax, then, such short-term capital gains shall be reduced by the amount by which the total income
as so reduced falls short of the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax and the tax on the
balance of such short-term capital gains shall be computed at the 
17[rate as applicable in clause ( i)]:
Provided further  that  nothing contained  in  clause  ( b)  shall apply  to  a  transaction  undertaken  on  a
r e c o g n i s e d s t o c k e x c h a n g e l o c a t e d i n a n y I n t e r n a t i o n a l F i n a n c i a l S e r v i c e s C e n t r e a n d w h e r e t h econsideration for such transaction is paid or payable in foreign currency.
(2) Where  the  gross total income  of an assessee  in cludes any short-term capital gains referred to  in
sub-section (1), the deduction under Chapter VI-A shall be allowed from the gross total income as reduced
by such capital gains.
(3) 
18[***]
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "equity oriented fund" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( a) of the Explanation toINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
433 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
section 112A;
(b) "International Financial Services Centre" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( q)
of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);
(c) "recognised stock exchange" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( ii) of the Explanation
1 to sub-section ( 5) of section 43.

16. Sub. by the Act No. 15 Act, 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.

17. Sub. for "rate of fifteen per cent" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.

18. Omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
T ax on long-term capital gains.

112. (1) Where the total income of an assessee includes any income, arising from the transfer of a long-term
capital asset, which is chargeable under the head "Capit al gains", the tax payable by the assessee on the total
income shall be the aggregate of,—
19[(a)in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, being a resident,—
(i) the amount of income-tax payable on the total income as reduced by the amount of such
long-term capital gains, had the total income as so reduced been his total income; and
(ii) the amount of income-tax calculated on such long-term capital gains,—
(A) at the rate of twenty per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd
day of July, 2024; and
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent for any transfer which takes place on
or after the 23rd day of July, 2024:
Provided that where the total income as reduced by such long-term capital gains is below the
maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax, then, such long-term capital gains shall
be reduced by the amount by which the total inco me as so reduced falls short of the maximum
amount which is not chargeable to income-tax and the tax on the balance of such long-term capitalgains shall be computed at the rate as applicable in sub-clause ( ii):
Provided further  that in the case of transfer of a long-term capital asset, being land or building or
both, which is acquired before the 23rd day of July, 2024, where the income-tax computed underitem ( B) exceeds the income-tax computed in accordanc e with the provisions of this Act, as they
stood immediately before their amendment by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2024, such excess shall be
ignored;
(b) in the case of a domestic company,—
(i) the amount of income-tax payable on the total income as reduced by the amount of such
long-term capital gains, had the total income as so reduced been its total income; and
(ii) the amount of income-tax calculated on such long-term capital gains,—
(A) at the rate of twenty per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd
day of July, 2024; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
434 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent for any transfer which takes place on
or after the 23rd day of July, 2024;
(c) in the case of a non-resident (not being a company) or a foreign company,—
(i) the amount of income-tax payable on the total income as reduced by the amount of such
long-term capital gains, had the total income as so reduced been its total income; and
(ii) the amount of income-tax calculated on long-term capital gains [except where such gain
arises from transfer of capital asset referred to in sub-clause ( iii)],—
(A) at the rate of twenty per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd
day of July, 2024; and
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent for any transfer which takes place on
or after the 23rd day of July, 2024; and
(iii) the amount of income-tax on long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital
asset, being unlisted securities or shares of a company not being a company in which the
public  are  substantially interested, as computed without  giving effect  to the  first  andsecond provisos to section 48, calculated on such long-term capital gains,—
(A) at the rate of ten per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd day
of July, 2024; and
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent for any transfer which takes place on
or after the 23rd day of July, 2024;
(d) in any other case of a resident,—
(i) the  amount of income-tax payable  on the total income  as reduced by the  amount  of
long-term capital gains, had the total income as so reduced been its total income; and
(ii) the amount of income-tax calculated on such long-term capital gains,—
(A) at the rate of twenty per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd
day of July, 2024; and
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent for any transfer which takes place on
or after the 23rd day of July, 2024:
Provided that where the tax payable in respect of any income arising from the transfer of a long-term
capital asset which takes place before the 23rd day of July, 2024, being listed securities (other than a unit) or
zero coupon bond, exceeds ten per cent of the amount of capital gains before giving effect to the provisions
of the second proviso to section 48, then, such excess  shall be ignored for the purpose of computing the tax
payable by the assessee :]
Provided further  that where the  tax payable in respect of any  income  arising from the  transfer  of  a
long-term capital asset, being a unit of a Mutual Fund specified under clause ( 23D) of section 10, during the
period beginning on the 1st day of April, 2014 and ending on the 10th day of July, 2014, exceeds ten percent of the amount of capital gains, before giving effect to the provisions of the second proviso to section 48,
then, such excess shall be ignored for the purpose of computing the tax payable by the assessee.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) the expression "securities" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (32 of 1956);
(aa) "listed securities" means the securities which are listed on any recognised stock exchange in India;
(ab) "unlisted securities" means securities other than listed securities.
(b) [***]
(2) Where the gross total income of an assessee include s any income arising from the transfer of a long-term
capital asset, the gross total income shall be reduced by the amount of such income and the deduction underINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
435 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Chapter VI-A shall be allowed as if the gross total inco me as so reduced were the gross total income of the
assessee.
(3) 20[***]

19. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.

20. Omtt. by Act No. 8 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
T ax on long-term capital gains in certain cases.

112A.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 112, the tax payable by an assessee on his total
income shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), if—
(i) the total income includes any income chargeable under the head "Capital gains";
(ii) the capital gains arise from the transfer of a long-term capital asset being an equity share in a
company or a unit of an equity oriented fund or a unit of a business trust;
(iii) securities transaction tax under Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004 (23 of 2004) has,—
(a) in a case where the long-term capital asset is in  the nature of an equity share in a company,
been paid on acquisition and transfer of such capital asset; or
(b) in a case where the long-term capital asset is in the nature of a unit of an equity oriented
fund or a unit of a business trust, been paid on transfer of such capital asset.
(2) The tax payable by the assessee on the total income referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the aggregate
of—
21[(i)the  amount  of  income-tax  calculated  on  such  long-term  capital  gains  exceeding  one  lakh
twenty-five thousand rupees—
(a) on long-term capital gains at the rate of te n per cent for any transfer which takes place
before the 23rd day of July, 2024; and
(b) on long-term capital gains, at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent for any transfer
which takes place on or after the 23rd day of July, 2024:
Provided that the limit of one lakh twenty-five t housand rupees shall apply on aggregate of the
long-term capital gains under sub-clauses ( a) and ( b);]
(ii) the amount of income-tax payable on the total income as reduced by the amount of long-term
capital gains referred to in sub-section (1) as if the total income so reduced were the total income
of the assessee:
Provided  that in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, being a resident, where the total
income as reduced by such long-term capital gains is below the maximum amount which is not chargeable toincome-tax, then, the long-term capital gains, for the purposes of clause ( i), shall be reduced by the amount
by which the total income as so reduced falls shor t of the maximum amount which is not chargeable to
income-tax.
(3) The condition specified in clause ( iii) of sub-section (1) shall not apply to a transfer undertaken on a
r e c o g n i s e d s t o c k e x c h a n g e l o c a t e d i n a n y I n t e r n a t i o n a l F i n a n c i a l S e r v i c e s C e n t r e a n d w h e r e t h eINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
436 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
consideration for such transfer is received or receivable in foreign currency.
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the nature of acquisition in
respect of which the provisions of sub-clause ( a) of clause ( iii) of sub-section (1) shall not apply.
(5)  Where  the  gross  total  income  of  an  assessee  includes any long-term capital gains referred to in
sub-section (1), the deduction under Chapter VI-A shall be allowed from the gross total income as reduced
by such capital gains.
(6) Where the total income of an assessee includes any l ong-term capital gains referred to in sub-section (1),
the rebate under section 87A shall be allowed from the income-tax on the total income as reduced by tax
payable on such capital gains.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "equity oriented fund" means a fund set up under a scheme of a mutual fund specified under clause
(23D) of section 10 or under a scheme of an insurance company comprising unit linked insurance
policies to which exemption under clause ( 10D) of the said section does not apply 22-23[on account
of the applicability of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof ] and,—
(i) in  a  case  where  the  fund  invests in  the  units of  another  fund  which is traded  on  a
recognised stock exchange,—
(A) a minimum of ninety per cent of the total pr oceeds of such fund is invested in the
units of such other fund; and
(B) such other fund also invests a minimum of ninety per cent of its total proceeds in
the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a recognised stock exchange;and
(ii) in any other case, a minimum of sixty-five per cent of the total proceeds of such fund is
invested in the equity shares of domestic companies listed on a recognised stock exchange:
Provided  that the percentage of equity shareholding or  unit held in respect of the fund, as the case
may be, shall be computed with reference to the annual average of the monthly averages of the
opening and closing figures:
Provided further that  in case  of a  scheme  of an insurance  company comprising unit  linked
insurance policies to which exemption under clause ( 10D) of section 10 does not apply 
22-23[on
account of the applicability of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof ], the minimum requirement of
ninety per cent or sixty-five per cent, as the case may be, is required to be satisfied throughout the
term of such insurance policy;
(b) "International Financial Services Centre" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( q) of
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);
(c) "recognised stock exchange" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( ii) of Explanation 1 to
clause ( 5) of section 43.

21. Sub. by Act No. of 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.
22-23.  Words "on account of the applicab ility of the fourth and fifth provisos thereof" shall be Omtt. by
Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
437 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
T ax in the case of block assessment of search cases .

113. The  total 24[undisclosed ] income  of the  block period, determined under section 158BC, shall be
chargeable to tax at the rate of sixty per cent:
Provided that the tax chargeable under this section shall be increased by a surcharge, if any, levied by any
Central Act 25[***].

24. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 . Earlier, word "undisclosed" was Omtt. by Act No. 15 of
2024, w.e.f. 1-9-2024.

25. Words "and applicable in the assessment year rele vant to the previous year in which the search is
initiated under section 132 or the requisition is made under section 132A" Omtt. by Act No. 15 of2024, w.e.f. 1-9-2024.
T ax on capital gains in cases of assessees other than companies.

114.  [Omitted  by  the  Finance  (No.  2)  Act,  1967,  w .e.f.  1-4-1968  and  reintroduced  with  material
modifications in section 80T. Section 114 was substituted first by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1962, w.e.f.
1-4-1962 and later on amended by the Finance Act, 1964, w.e.f. 1-4-1964, the Finance Act, 1965, w.e.f.1-4-1965, the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1965, w.e.f. 11-9-1965 and the Finance Act, 1966, w .e.f. 1-4-1966. ]
T ax on capital gains in case of companies.

115. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
T ax on dividends, royalty and technical service fees in the case of foreign companies.

115A.  (1) Where the total income of—
(a) a non-resident (not being a company) or of a foreign company, includes any income by way of—
(i) dividends ; or
(ii) interest received from Government or an Indian concern on monies borrowed or debt
incurred by Government or the Indian concern in foreign currency not being interest of thenature referred to in sub-clause ( iia) or sub-clause ( iiaa); or
(iia) interest received from an infrastructure debt fund referred to in clause ( 47) of section 10;
or
(iiaa) interest of the nature and extent referred to in section 194LC; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
438 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iiab) interest of the nature and extent referred to in section 194LD; or
(iiac) distributed income being interest referred to in sub-section (2) of section 194LBA;
(iii) income received in respect of units, purchased in foreign currency, of a Mutual Fund
specified under clause ( 23D) of section 10 or of the Unit Trust of India,
the income-tax payable shall be aggregate of—
(A) the amount of income-tax calculated on the amount of income by way of dividends, if any,
included in the total income, at the rate of twenty per cent :
26[Provided that the amount of income-tax calculated on the amount of income by way of
dividend received from a unit in an Internati onal Financial Services Centre, as referred to
in sub-section (1A) of section 80LA, shall be ten per cent;]
(B) the amount of income-tax calculated on the amount of income by way of interest referred
to in sub-clause ( ii), if any, included in the total income, at the rate of twenty per cent ;
(BA) the amount of income-tax calculated on the amount of income by way of interest referred
to in,—
(i) sub-clause ( iia), if any, included in the total income, at the rate of five per cent;
(ii) sub-clause ( iiaa) or sub-clause ( iiab) or sub-clause ( iiac), if any, included in the
total income, at the rate provided in the respective sections referred to in the said
sub-clauses;
(C) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income in respect of units referred to in
sub-clause ( iii), if any, included in the total income, at the rate of twenty per cent ; and
(D) the amount of income-tax with which he or it would have been chargeable had his or its
total  income  been  reduced  by  the  amount  of  income  referred  to  in  sub-clause  ( i),
sub-clause ( ii), sub-clause ( iia), sub-clause ( iiaa), sub-clause ( iiab), sub-clause ( iiac) and
sub-clause ( iii) ;
(b) a non-resident (not being a company) or a foreign company, includes any income by way of royalty
or fees for technical services other than income referred to in sub-section (1) of section 44DA
received from Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by the foreign
company with Government or the Indian concer n after the 31st day of March, 1976, and where
such agreement is with an Indian concern, the agreement is approved by the Central Government
or where it relates to a matter included in the industrial policy, for the time being in force, of theGovernment  of  India,  the  agreement  is  in  acco rdance  with that  policy,  then, subject  to  the
provisions of sub-sections (1A) and (2), the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of,—
(A) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of royalty, if any, included in
the total income, at the rate of 
27[twenty] per cent;
(B) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of fees for technical services,
if any, included in the total income, at the rate of 27[twenty] per cent; and
(C) the amount of income-tax with which it would have been chargeable had its total income
been reduced by the amount of income by way of royalty and fees for technical services.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "fees for technical services" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2  to clause ( vii) of
sub-section (1) of section 9 ;
(b) "foreign currency" shall have the same meaning as in the Explanation  below item ( g) of sub-clause
(iv) of clause ( 15) of section 10 ;
(c) "royalty" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to clause ( vi) of sub-section (1) of
section 9 ;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
439 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(d) "Unit Trust of India" means the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act,
1963 (52 of 1963).
(1A) Where the royalty referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) is in consideration for the transfer of all or
any rights (including the granting of a licence) in resp ect of copyright in any book to an Indian concern or in
respect of any computer software to a person resident in India, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply
in relation to such royalty as if the words the agreement is approved by the Central Government or where it
relates to a matter included in the industrial policy, for the time being in force, of the Government of India,
the agreement is in accordance with that policy occurring in the said clause had been omitted :
Provided  that such book is on a subject, the books on which are permitted, according to the Import Trade
Control Policy of the Government of India for the pe riod commencing from the 1st day of April, 1977, and
ending with the 31st day of March, 1978, to be imported into India under an Open General Licence :
Provided further that such computer software is permitted according to the Import Trade Control Policy of
the Government of India for the time being in forc e to be imported into India under an Open General
Licence.
Explanation 1 .—In this sub-section, "Open General Licence" means an Open General Licence issued by the
Central Government in pursuance of the Imports (Control) Order, 1955.
Explanation 2 .—In this sub-section, the expression "computer software" shall have the meaning assigned to
it in clause ( b) of the Explanation  to section 80HHE.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply in relation to any income by way of royalty received by
a foreign company from an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement made by it with the Indian concern
after the 31st day of March, 1976, if such agreement is deemed, for the purposes of the first proviso to
clause ( vi) of sub-section (1) of section 9, to have been  made before the 1st day of April, 1976; and the
provisions of the annual Finance Act for calculating, charging, deducting or computing income-tax shall
apply in relation to such income as if such income had been received in pursuance of an agreement madebefore the 1st day of April, 1976.
(3) No deduction in respect of any expenditure or a llowance shall be allowed to the assessee under sections
28 to 44C and section 57 in computing his or its income referred to in sub-section (1).
(4) Where in the case of an assessee referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) the gross total income consists only of the income referred to in clause ( a) of that sub-section, no
deduction shall be allowed to him or it under Chapter VI-A;
(b) the gross total income includes any income referred to in clause ( a) of that sub-section, the gross
total income shall be reduced by the amount of such income and the deduction under Chapter VI-A
shall be allowed as if the gross total income as so reduced were  the gross total income of the
assessee:
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to a deduction allowed to a Unit of an
International Financial Services Centre under section 80LA.
(5) It shall not be necessary for an assessee referred to in sub-section (1) to furnish under sub-section (1) of
section 139 a return of his or its income if—
(a) his or its total income in respect of which he or it is assessable under this Act during the previous
year consisted only of income referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section (1); and
(b) the tax deductible at source under the provisions of Part B of Chapter XVII has been deducted
from such income and the rate of such deduction is not less than the rate specified under clause ( a)
or, as the case may be, clause ( b) of sub-section (1).INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
440 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

26. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

27. Sub. for "ten" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.
T ax on income from units purchased in foreign currency or capital gains arising from their transfer.

115AB.  (1) Where the total income of an assessee, being an overseas financial organisation (hereinafter
referred to as Offshore Fund) includes—
(a) income received in respect of units purchased in foreign currency; or
(b) income by way of long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of units purchased in foreign
currency,
the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of—
(i) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income  in respect of units referred to in clause ( a), if
any, included in the total income, at the rate of ten per cent;
28[(ii)the amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of long-term capital gains referred to in
clause ( b), if any, included in the total income,—
(A) at the rate of ten per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd day of July,
2024; and
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent fo r any transfer which takes place on or after
the 23rd day of July, 2024; and]
(iii) the amount of income-tax with which the Offshore Fund would have been chargeable had its total
income been reduced by the amount of income referred to in clause ( a) and clause ( b).
(2) Where the gross total income of the Offshore Fund,—
(a) consists only of income from units or income by way of long-term capital gains arising from the
transfer of units, or both, no deduction shall be allowed to the assessee under sections 28 to 44C orclause ( i) or clause  ( iii)  of  section 57  or  under  Chapter  VI-A and nothing contained in  the
provisions of the second proviso to section 48 sh all apply to income referred to in clause ( b) of
sub-section (1);
(b) includes any income referred to in clause ( a), the gross total income shall be reduced by the
amount of such income and the deduction under Chapter VI-A shall be allowed as if the gross total
income as so reduced were the gross total income of the assessee.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "overseas  financial  organisation"  means  any  fund,  institution,  associa-tion  or  body,  whether
incorporated or not, established under the laws of a country outside India, which has entered into
an arrangement for investment in India with any public sector bank or public financial institution ora mutual fund specified under clause ( 23D) of section 10 and such arrangement is approved by the
Securities and Exchange Board of India, established under the Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992), for this purpose;
(b) "unit" means unit of a mutual fund specified under clause ( 23D) of section 10 or of the Unit Trust
of India;
(c) "foreign currency" shall have the meaning as in the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42
of 1999);
(d) "public sector bank" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 23D) of section 10;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
441 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(e) "public financial institution" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4A of the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(f) "Unit Trust of India" means the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act,
1963 (52 of 1963).

28. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.
T ax on income from bonds or Global Depository Receipts purchased in foreign currency or capital
gains arising from their transfer.

115AC.  (1) Where the total income of an assessee, being a non-resident, includes—
(a) income by way of interest on bonds of an Indian company issued in accordance with such scheme
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, or on
bonds of a public sector company sold by the Government, and purchased by him in foreign
currency; or
(b) income by way of dividends on Global Depository Receipts—
(i) issued in accordance with such scheme as the Central Govern-ment may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, against the initial issue of shares of an Indiancompany and purchased by him in foreign currency through an approved intermediary; or
(ii) issued  against  the  shares  of  a  public  sector  company  sold  by  the  Government  and
purchased by him in foreign currency through an approved intermediary; or
(iii) issued or re-issued in accordance with such scheme as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, against the existing shares of an
Indian company purchased by him in foreign currency through an approved intermediary;or
(iv) [***]
(c) income by way of long-term capital gains arising fr om the transfer of bonds referred to in clause ( a)
or, as the case may be, Global Depository Receipts referred to in clause ( b),
the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of—
(i) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of interest or dividends, as the case
may be, in respect of bonds referred to in clause ( a) or Global Depository Receipts referred to in
clause ( b), if any, included in the total income, at the rate of ten per cent;
29[(ii)the amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of long-term capital gains referred to in
clause ( c), if any, included in the total income,—
(A) at the rate of ten per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd day of July,
2024; and
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent fo r any transfer which takes place on or after
the 23rd day of July, 2024; and]
(iii) the amount of income-tax with which the non-resident would have been chargeable had his totalINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
442 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
income been reduced by the amount of income referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c).
(2) Where the gross total income of the non-resident—
(a) consists only of income by way of interest or divi dends in respect of bonds referred to in clause ( a)
of sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, Globa l Depository Receipts referred to in clause ( b) of
that sub-section, no deduction shall be allowed to him under sections 28 to 44C or clause ( i) or
clause ( iii) of section 57 or under Chapter VI-A;
(b) includes any income referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub-section (1), the gross
total income shall be reduced by the amount of such income and the deduction under Chapter VI-A
shall be allowed as if the gross total income as  so reduced, were the gross total income of the
assessee.
(3) Nothing contained in the first and second provisos to section 48 shall apply for the computation of
long-term capital gains  arising out  of  the  transfer  of  long-term capital asset,  being bonds  or  Global
Depository Receipts referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section (1).
(4) It shall not be necessary for a non-resident to furn ish under sub-section (1) of section 139 a return of his
income if—
(a) his total income in respect of which he is assessable under this Act during the previous year
consisted only of income referred to in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-section (1); and
(b) the tax deductible at source under the provisions  of Chapter XVII-B has been deducted from such
income.
(5) Where  the  assessee  acquired Global Depository Receipts or bonds in an amalgamated or resulting
company by virtue of his holding Global Depository Receipts or bonds in the amalgamating or demerged
company, as the case may be, in accordance with th e provisions of sub-section (1), the provisions of that
sub-section shall apply to such Global Depository Receipts or bonds.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "approved intermediary" means an intermediary who is approved in accordance with such scheme
as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette;
(b) "Global Depository Receipts" shall have the same meaning as in clause ( a) of the Explanation to
section 115ACA.

29. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.
T ax on income  from Global  Depository  Receipts purchased in foreign currency or  capital  gains
arising from their transfer.

115ACA.  (1) Where the total income of an assessee, being an individual, who is a resident and an employee
of an Indian company engaged in specified knowledge based industry or service, or an employee of its
subsidiary engaged in specified knowledge based industry or service (hereafter in this section referred to as
the resident employee), includes—
(a) income by way of dividends on Global Depository Receipts of an Indian company engaged inINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
443 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
specified knowledge based industry or service, issued in accordance with such Employees' Stock
Option Scheme as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify inthis behalf and purchased by him in foreign currency; or
(b) income by way of long-term capital gains arising from the transfer of Global Depository Receipts
referred to in clause ( a),
the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of—
(i) the amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of dividends in respect of Global
Depository Receipts referred to in clause ( a), if any, included in the total income, at the rate of ten
per cent;
30[(ii)the amount of income-tax calculated on the income by way of long-term capital gains referred to in
clause ( b), if any, included in the total income,—
(A)at the rate of ten per cent for any transfer which takes place before the 23rd day of July,
2024; and
(B) at the rate of twelve and one-half per cent fo r any transfer which takes place on or after
the 23rd day of July, 2024; and]
(iii) the amount of income-tax with which the resident employee would have been chargeable had his
total income been reduced by the amount of income referred to in clauses ( a) and ( b).
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "specified knowledge based industry or service" means—
(i) information technology software;
(ii) information technology service;
(iii) entertainment service;
(iv) pharmaceutical industry;
(v) bio-technology industry; and
(vi) any  other  industry  or  service,  as  may  be  specified  by  the  Central Government,  by
notification in the Official Gazette;
(b) "subsidiary" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956) and includes subsidiary incorporated outside India.
(2) Where the gross total income of the resident employee—
(a) consists only of income by way of dividends in respect of Global Depository Receipts referred to in
clause ( a) of sub-section (1), no deduction shall be allowed to him under any other provision of this
Act;
(b) includes any income referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section (1), the gross total income
shall be reduced by the amount of such income and the deduction under any provision of this Act
shall be allowed as if the gross total income as so reduced were  the gross total income of theassessee.
(3) Nothing contained in the first and second provisos to section 48 shall apply for the computation of
long-term capital gains arising out  of  the  transfer of  long-term capital asset,  being Global Depository
Receipts referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1).
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "Global Depository  Receipts"  means  any  instrument  in  the  form  of  a  depository  receipt  or
certificate (by whatever name called) created by the Overseas Depository Bank outside India or in
an International Financial Services Centre and issued to investors against the issue of,—
(i) ordinary  shares  of  issuing  company,  being  a  company  listed  on  a  recognised  stockINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
444 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
exchange in India; or
(ii) foreign currency convertible bonds of issuing company;
(iii) ordinary shares of issuing company, being a company incorporated outside India, if such
depository receipt or certificate is listed and traded on any International Financial Services
Centre;
(b) "information technology service" means any service which results from the use of any information
technology software over a system of information technology products for realising value addition;
(c) "information technology software" means any representation of instructions, data, sound or image,
including source code and object code, recorded in a machine readable form and capable of being
manipulated  or  providing inter-activity  to  a  user,  by  means  of  an  automatic  data  processing
machine  falling  under  heading  information  technology  products  but  does  not  include
non-information technology products;
(ca) "International Financial Services Centre" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( q) of
section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);
(d) "Overseas Depository Bank" means a bank authorised by the issuing company to issue Global
Depository Receipts against issue of Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds or ordinary shares of the
issuing company.

30. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.r.e.f. 23-7-2024.
T ax on income of Foreign Institutional Investors from securities or capital gains arising from their
transfer.