232. The several modes of recovery specified in this Chapter shall not affect in any way—
(a) any other law for the time being in force relating to the recovery of debts due to Government; or
(b) the right of the Government to institute a suit for the recovery of the arrears due from the assessee;
and it shall be lawful for the Assessing Officer or th e Government, as the case may be, to have recourse to
any such law or suit, notwithstanding that the tax due is being recovered from the assessee by any mode
specified in this Chapter.
E.—Tax payable under provisional assessment
Recovery of tax payable under provisional assessment.

233. [Omitted by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1970, w.e.f. 1-4-1971. ]
T ax paid by deduction or advance payment.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
719 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

234. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1989. ]
F.—Interest chargeable in certain cases
Interest for defaults in furnishing return of income.

234A.  (1) Where the return of income for any assessment year under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) or
sub-section (8A) of section 139, or in response to a notice under sub-section (1) of section 142, is furnished
after the due date, or is not furnished, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per
cent for every month or part  of a month comprised in the period commencing on the date immediately
following the due date, and,—
(a) where the return is furnished after the due date, ending on the date of furnishing of the return; or—
(b) where no return has been furnished, ending on the date of completion of the assessment under
section 144,
on the amount of the tax on the total income as dete rmined under sub-section (1) of section 143, and where
a regular assessment is made, on the amount of the tax on the total income determined under regular
assessment, as reduced by the amount of,—
(i) advance tax, if any, paid;
(ii) any tax deducted or collected at source;
(iia) any relief of tax allowed under section 89;
(iii) any relief of tax allowed under section 90 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
(iv) any relief of tax allowed under section 90A on account of tax paid in a specified territory outside
India referred to in that section;
(v) any deduction, from the Indian income-tax payable, allowed under section 91, on account of tax
paid in a country outside India; and
(vi) any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordanc e with the provisions of section 115JAA or section

115JD.
Explanation 1. —In this section, "due date" means the date specified in sub-section (1) of section 139 as
applicable in the case of the assessee.
Explanation 2.— In this sub-section,—
(i) "tax on total income as determined under sub-section (1) of section 143" shall not include the
additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143; and
(ii) tax on the  total income  determined under regular assessment  shall not  include  the  additional
income-tax payable under section 140B.
Explanation 3. —Where, in relation to an assessment year, an assessment is made for the first time under
section 147 or section 153A, the assessment so made shall be regarded as a regular assessment for thepurposes of this section.
Explanation 4. —[* * *]
(2) The interest payable under sub-section (1) shall be reduced by the interest, if any, paid under section
140A towards the interest chargeable under this section.
(3) Where the return of income for any assessment ye ar, required by a notice under section 148 or section
153A issued after the determination of income under sub-section (1) of section 143 or after the completionof an assessment under sub-section (3) of section 143 or  section 144 or section 147, is furnished after the
expiry of the time allowed under such notice, or is not furnished, the assessee shall be liable to pay simpleINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
720 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
interest at the rate of one per cent for every month or part of a month comprised in the period commencin g
on the day immediately following the expiry of the time allowed as aforesaid, a nd,—
(a) where the return is furnished after the expiry of th e time aforesaid, ending on the date of furnishing
the return; or
(b) where no return has been furnished, ending on the date of completion of the reassessment or
recomputation under section 147 or reassessment under section 153A,
on the amount by which the tax on the total income determined on the basis of such reassessment or
recomputation exceeds the tax on the total income dete rmined under sub-section (1) of section 143 or on the
basis of the earlier assessment aforesaid.
Explanation. —[* * *]
(4) Where as a result of an order under section 154 or section 155 or section 250 or section 254 or section
260 or section 262 or section 263 or section 264 or an order of the Settlement Co mmission under sub-section
(4) of section 245D, the amount of tax on which interest was payable under sub-section (1) or sub-section(3) of this section has been increased or reduced, as  the case may be, the interest shall be increased or
reduced accordingly, and—
(i) in a case where the interest is increased, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice
of demand in the prescribed form specifying th e sum payable, and such notice of demand shall be
deemed to be a notice under section 156 and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly;
(ii) in a case where the interest is reduced, the excess interest paid, if any, shall be refunded.
(5) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of assessments for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1989 and subsequent assessment years.
Interest for defaults in payment of advance tax.

234B.  (1) Subject to the other provisions of this section, where, in any financial year, an assessee who is
liable to pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to pay such tax or, where the advance tax paid by
such assessee under the provisions of section 210 is le ss than ninety per cent of the assessed tax, the
assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent for every month or part of a monthcomprised in  the  period from the  1st  day of  April next  following such financial year  to the  date  of
determination of total income under sub-section (1) of section 143 and where a regular assessment is made,
to the date of such regular assessment, on an amount equal to the assessed tax or, as the case may be, on theamount by which the advance tax paid as aforesaid falls short of the assessed tax.
Explanation  1. —In  this section,  "assessed  tax"  means the  tax  on  the  total income  determined  under
sub-section  (1)  of  section  143  and  where  a  regula r  assessment  is  made,  the  tax  on  the  total  income
determined under such regular assessment as reduced by the amount of,—
(i) any tax deducted or collected at source in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII on any
income  which  is subject  to  such  deduction  or  collection  and  which  is taken  into  account  incomputing such total income;
(ia) any relief of tax allowed under section 89;
(ii) any relief of tax allowed under section 90 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
(iii) any relief of tax allowed under section 90A on account of tax paid in a specified territory outside
India referred to in that section;
(iv) any deduction, from the Indian income-tax payable, allowed under section 91, on account of tax
paid in a country outside India; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
721 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(v) any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordanc e with the provisions of section 115JAA or section

115JD.
Explanation 2. —Where, in relation to an assessment year, an assessment is made for the first time under
section 147 or section 153A, the assessment so made shall be regarded as a regular assessment for thepurposes of this section.
Explanation 3. —In Explanation 1  and in sub-section (3),—
(i) "tax on total income as determined under sub-section (1) of section 143" shall not include the
additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143; and
(ii) tax on the total income determined under such regular assessment shall not include the additional
income-tax payable under section 140B.
(2) Where, before  the  date  of determination of total income  under sub-section (1)  of section  143  or
completion of a regular assessment, tax is paid by the assessee under section 140A or otherwise,—
(i) interest shall be calculated in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section up to the
date on which the tax is so paid, and reduced by the interest, if any, paid under section 140A
towards the interest chargeable under this section;
(ii) thereafter, interest shall be calculated at the ra te aforesaid on the amount by which the tax so paid
together with the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.
(2A) ( a) Where an application under sub-section (1) of section 245C for any assessment year has been
made, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent for every month or part ofa month comprised in the period commencing on the 1st day of April of such assessment year and ending on
the date of making such application, on the additional amount of income-tax referred to in that sub-section;
(b) where as a result of an order of the Settlemen t Commission under sub-section (4) of section 245D for
any assessment year, the amount of total income disclosed in the application under sub-section (1) of section245C is increased, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent for every
month or part of a month comprised in the period commencing on the 1st day of April of such assessment
year and ending on the date of such order, on the amount by which the tax on the total income determinedon the basis of such order exceeds the tax on the total income disclosed in the application filed under
sub-section (1) of section 245C;
(c) where, as a result of an order under sub-section (6B) of section 245D, the amount on which interest was
payable under clause ( b) has been increased or reduced, as the case may be, the interest shall be increased
or reduced accordingly.
(3) Where, as a result of an order of reassessment or recomputation under section 147 or section 153A, the
amount on which interest was payable in respect of shortfall in payment of advance tax for any financial
year under sub-section (1) is increased, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of oneper cent for every month or part of a month comprised in the period commencing on the 1st day of April
next following such financial year and ending on the date of the reassessment or recomputation under
section 147 or section 153A, on the amount by which the tax on the total income determined on the basis of
the reassessment or recomputation exceeds the tax on the total income determined under sub-section (1) of
section 143 or on the basis of the regular assessment as referred to in sub-section (1), as the case may be.
(4) Where, as a result of an order under section 154 or  section 155 or section 250 or section 254 or section
260  or  section  262  or  section  263  or  section  264,  the  amount  on  which  interest  was payable  undersub-section (1) or sub-section (3) has been increased or reduced, as the case may be, the interest shall be
increased or reduced accordingly, and—
(i) in a case where the interest is increased, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice
of demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum payable and such notice of demand shall be
deemed to be a notice under section 156 and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly;
(ii) in a case where the interest is reduced, the excess interest paid, if any, shall be refunded.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
722 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(5) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of assessments for the assessment year commencin g
on the 1st day of April, 1989 and subsequent assessment years.
Interest for deferment of advance tax.

234C. (1) Where in any financial year,—
(a) an assessee, other than the assessee referred to in clause ( b), who is liable to pay advance tax under
section 208 has failed to pay such tax or—
(i) the advance tax paid by such assessee on its current income on or before the 15th day of
June is less than fifteen per cent of the ta x due on the returned income or the amount of
such advance tax paid on or before the 15th da y of September is less than forty-five per
cent of the tax due on the returned income or the amount of such advance tax paid on or
before the 15th day of December is less than seventy-five per cent of the tax due on the
returned income, then, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of oneper cent per month for a period of three months on the amount of the shortfall from fifteen
per cent or forty-five per cent or seventy-five per cent, as the case may be, of the tax due
on the returned income;
(ii) the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current income on or before the 15th day of
March is less than the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be liable to
pay simple interest at the rate of one per ce nt on the amount of the shortfall from the tax
due on the returned income:
Provided  that if the advance tax paid by the a ssessee on the current income, on or before
the 15th day of June or the 15th day of Septembe r, is not less than twelve per cent or, as
the case may be, thirty-six per cent of the tax due on the returned income, then, the
assessee shall not be liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on those
dates;
(b) an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 44AD or sub-section (1) of section 44ADA ,  as the  case  may  be  who  is liable  to  pay
advance tax under section 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by the assessee
on its current income on or before the 15th day of  March is less than the tax due on the returned
income, then, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent on the
amount of the shortfall from the tax due on the returned income:
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any shortfall in the payment of the tax due
on the returned income where such shortfall is on account of under-estimate or failure to estimate—
(a) the amount of capital gains; or
(b) income of the nature referred to in sub-clause ( ix) of clause ( 24) of section 2; or
(c) income under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession" in cases where the income
accrues or arises under the said head for the first time; or
(d) the amount of dividend income,
and the assessee has paid the whole of the amount of tax payable in respect of income referred to in clause
(a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d), as the case may be, had such income been a part of the total
income, as part of the remaining instalments of advanc e tax which are due or where no such instalments are
due, by the 31st day of March of the financial year:
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any shortfall in the payment of theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
723 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
tax due on the returned income where such shortfall is  on account of increase in the rate of surcharge under
section 2 of the Finance Act, 2000 (10 of 2000), as amended by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2000
(1 of 2001), and the assessee has paid the amount of shor tfall, on or before the 15th day of March, 2001 in
respect of the instalment of advance tax due on th e 15th day of June, 2000, the 15th day of September, 2000
and the 15th day of December, 2000 :
Provided also that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any shortfall in the payment of the
tax due on the returned income where such shortfall is  on account of increase in the rate of surcharge under
section 2 of the Finance Act, 2000 (10 of 2000) as amended by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2001(4 of 2001) and the assessee has paid the amount of s hortfall on or before the 15th day of March, 2001 in
respect of the instalment of advance tax due on th e 15th day of June, 2000, the 15th day of September, 2000
and 15th day of December, 2000.
Explanation 1. —In this section, "tax due on the returned income" means the tax chargeable on the total
income declared in the return of income furnished by the assessee for the assessment year commencing on
the 1st day of April immediately following the financial y ear in which the advance tax is paid or payable, as
reduced by the amount of,—
(i) any tax deductible or collectible at source in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII on
any income which is subject to such deduction or collection and which is taken into account incomputing such total income;
(ia) any relief of tax allowed under section 89;
(ii) any relief of tax allowed under section 90 on account of tax paid in a country outside India;
(iii) any relief of tax allowed under section 90A on account of tax paid in a specified territory outside
India referred to in that section;
(iv) any deduction, from the Indian income-tax payable, allowed under section 91, on account of tax
paid in a country outside India; and
(v) any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordanc e with the provisions of section 115JAA or section

115JD.
Explanation 2 .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the term "dividend" shall have the meaning assigned
to it in clause ( 22) of section 2, but shall not include sub-clause ( e) thereof.
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of assessments for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1989 and subsequent assessment years.
Interest on excess refund.

234D.  (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act,  where any refund is granted to the assessee under
sub-section (1) of section 143, and—
(a) no refund is due on regular assessment; or
(b) the amount refunded under sub-section (1) of section 143 exceeds the  amount refundable  on
regular assessment,
the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one-half per cent on the whole or the excess
amount so refunded, for every month or part of a mont h comprised in the period from the date of grant of
refund to the date of such regular assessment.
(2) Where, as a result of an order under section 154 or  section 155 or section 250 or section 254 or section
260 or section 262 or section 263 or section 264 or an order of the Settlement Co mmission under sub-section
(4) of section 245D, the amount of refund granted under sub-section (1) of section 143 is held to beINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
724 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
correctly allowed, either in whole or in part, as the case may be, then, the interest chargeable, if any, under
sub-section (1) shall be reduced accordingly.
Explanation 1 .—Where, in relation to an assessment year, an assessment is made for the first time under
section 147 or section 153A, the assessment so made shall be regarded as a regular assessment for the
purposes of this section.
Explanation 2. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared  that the provisions of this section shall also
apply to an assessment year commencing before the 1s t day of June, 2003 if the proceedings in respect of
such assessment year is completed after the said date.
G.—Levy of fee in certain cases
Fee for default in furnishing statements.

234E.  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Act, where a person fails to deliver or cause to be
delivered  a  statement  within  the  time  prescribed  in  sub-section  (3)  of  section  200  or  the  proviso  to
sub-section (3) of section 206C, he shall be liable to pay, by way of fee, a sum of two hundred rupees for
every day during which the failure continues.
(2) The amount of fee referred to in sub-section (1) shall not exceed the amount of tax deductible or
collectible, as the case may be.
(3) The amount of fee referred to in sub-section (1) shall be paid before delivering or causing to be delivered
a statement in accordance with sub-section (3) of section 200 or the proviso to sub-section (3) of section206C.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply to a stat ement referred to in sub-section (3) of section 200 or
the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 206C which is  to be delivered or caused to be delivered for tax
deducted at source or tax collected at source, as the case may be, on or after the 1st day of July, 2012.
Fee for default in furnishing return of income.

234F.  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Ac t, where a person required to furnish a return of
income under section 139, fails to do so within the time prescribed in sub-section (1) of the said section, he
shall pay, by way of a fee, a sum of five thousand rupees :
Provided  that if the total income of the person does not exceed five lakh rupees, the fee payable under this
section shall not exceed one thousand rupees.
(2) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of return of income required to be furnished for the
assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2018.
Fee for default relating to statement or certificate.

234G.  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, where,—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
725 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) the research association, university, college or other institution referred to in clause ( ii) or clause
(iii) or the company referred to in clause ( iia) of sub-section (1) of section 35 fails to deliver or
cause  to  be  delivered  a  statement  within  the  time  prescribed  under  clause  ( i),  or  furnish  a
certificate prescribed under clause ( ii) of sub-section (1A) of that section; or
(b) the  institution  or  fund  fails  to  deliver  or  cause  to  be  delivered  a  statement  within  the  time
prescribed under clause ( viii) of sub-section (5) of section 80G, or furnish a certificate prescribed
under clause ( ix) of the said sub-section,
it shall be liable to pay, by way of fee, a sum of two hundred rupees for every day during which the failure
continues.
(2) The amount of fee referred to in sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) not exceed the amount in respect of which the failure referred to therein has occurred;
(b) be  paid  before  delivering or  causing to  be  delivered  the  statement  or  before  furnishing the
certificate referred to in sub-section (1).
Fee for default relating to intimation of Aadhaar number.

234H.  Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, where a person is required to intimate his Aadhaar
number under sub-section (2) of section 139AA and such pe rson fails to do so on or before such date, as
may be prescribed, he shall be liable to pay such fe e, as may be prescribed, not exceeding one thousand
rupees, at the time of making intimation under sub-section (2) of section 139AA after the said date.
CHAPTER XVIII
RELIEF RESPECTING TAX ON DIVIDENDS IN CERTAIN CASES
Relief to shareholders in respect of agricultural income-tax attributable to dividends.

235. [Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1971, w .e.f. 1-4-1972. Prior to its omission, it was amended by
the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1970, w .e.f. 1-4- 1971 and with retrospective effect from 1-4-1962, the
Finance Act, 1966, w.e.f. 1-4-1966 and the Finance Act, 1965, w .e.f. 1-4-1965. ]
Relief to company in respect of dividend paid out of past taxed profits.

236. (1) Where in respect of any previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing after the 31st
day of March, 1960, an Indian company or a company which has made the prescribed arrangements for the
declaration and payment of dividends within India, pays any dividend wholly or partly out of its profits andgains actually charged to income-tax for any assessment year ending before the 1st day of April, 1960, and
deducts tax therefrom in accordance with the provisions  of Chapter XVII-B, credit shall be given to the
company against the income-tax, if any, payable by it on the profits and gains of the previous year during
which the dividend is paid, of a sum calculated in a ccordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), and,
where the amount of credit so calculated exceeds the income-tax payable by the company as aforesaid, theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
726 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
excess shall be refunded.
(2) The amount of income-tax to be given as credit unde r sub-section (1) shall be a sum equal to ten per cent
of so much of the dividends referred to in sub-section (1) as are paid out of the profits and gains actually
charged to income-tax for any assessment year ending before the 1st day of April, 1960.
Explanation 1. —For the purposes of this section, the aggreg ate of the dividends declared by a company in
respect of any previous year shall be deemed first to have come out of the distributable income of thatprevious year and the balance, if any, out of the undistributed part of the distributable income of one or
more  previous years immediately  preceding that  previous year  as would  be  just  sufficient  to cover the
amount of such balance and as has not likewise been taken into account for covering such balance of anyother previous year.
Explanation 2. —The expression "distributable income of any previous year" shall mean the total income (as
computed before making any deduction under Chapter VI-A) assessed for that year as reduced by—
(i) the amount of tax payable by the company in respect of its total income;
(ii) the amount of any other tax levied under any law for the time being in force on the company by the
Government or by a local authority in excess of the amount, if any, which has been allowed in
computing the total income;
(iii) any sum with reference to which a deduction is allowable to the company under the provisions of
section 80G; and
(iv) in the case of a banking company, the amount actually transferred to a reserve fund under section
17 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 (10 of 1949),
and as increased by—
(a) any profits and gains or receipts of the company, not included in its total income (as computed
before making any deduction under Chapter VI-A); and
(b) any amount attributable to any allowance made in  computing the profits and gains of the company
for purposes of assessment, which the company has not taken into account in its profit and lossaccount.
Relief to certain charitable institutions or funds in respect of certain dividends.

236A.  (1) Where seventy-five per cent of the share capi tal of any company is throughout the previous year
beneficially held by an institution or fund estab lished in India for a charitable purpose the income from
dividend whereof is exempt under section 11, credit shal l be given to the institution or fund against the tax,
if any, payable by it, of a sum calculated in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2), in respect of
its income from dividends (other than dividends on preference shares) declared or distributed during the
previous year relevant to any assessment year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 1966 by such a
company, and where  the  amount  of credit  so calculated exceeds the  tax, if any, payable  by the  said
institution or fund, the excess shall be refunded.
(2) The amount to be given as credit under sub-section (1) shall be a sum which bears to the amount of the
tax payable by the company under the provisions of th e annual Finance Act with reference to the relevant
amount of distributions of dividends by it the same proportion as the amount of the dividends (other than
dividends on preference shares) received by the institution or fund from the company bears to the totalamount of dividends (other than dividends on preference shares) declared or distributed by the company
during the previous year.
Explanation. —In sub-section (2) of this section and in section 280ZB, the expression "the relevant amountINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
727 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
of distributions of dividends" has the meaning assigned to it in the Finance Act of the relevant year.
CHAPTER XIX
REFUNDS
Refunds .237 . If any person satisfies the Assessing Officer that the amount of tax paid by him or on his behalf or
treated as paid by him or on his behalf for any assessment year exceeds the amount with which he is
properly chargeable under this Act for that year, he shall be entitled to a refund of the excess.
Person entitled to claim refund in certain special cases.

238. (1) Where the income of one person is included under any provision of this Act in the total income of
any other person, the latter alone shall be entitled to a refund under this Chapter in respect of such income.
(1A) Where the value of fringe benefits provided or deemed to have been provided by one employer is
included under any provisions of Chapter XII-H in the value of fringe benefits provided or deemed to have
been provided by any other employer, the latter alone shall be entitled to a refund under this Chapter in
respect of such fringe benefits.
(2) Where through death, incapacity, insolvency, liquidation or other cause, a person is unable to claim or
receive any refund due to him, his legal representative or the trustee or guardian or receiver, as the case may
be, shall be entitled to claim or receive such refund for the benefit of such person or his estate.
Form of claim for refund and limitation.

239. (1) Every claim for refund under this Chapter shall be made by furnishingreturn in accordance with the
provisions of section 139.
(2) [***]
Refund for denying liability to deduct tax in certain cases.

239A.  (1) Where under an agreement or other arrangement, in writing, the tax deductible on any income,
other than interest, under section 195 is to be borne by  the person by whom the income is payable, and such
person having paid such tax to the credit of the Central Government claims that no tax was required to be
deducted on such income, may, within a period of thirty days from the date of payment of such tax, file an
application before the Assessing Officer for refund of  such tax in such form and such manner as may be
prescribed.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
728 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, allow or reject the application:
Provided  that no application under sub-section (1) shall be rejected unless an opportunity of being heard has
been given to the applicant.
(3) The Assessing Officer may, before passing an order under sub-section (2), make such inquiry as he
considers necessary.
(4) The order under sub-section (2) shall be passed within six months from the end of the month in which
application under sub-section (1) is received.
Refund on appeal, etc.

240. Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or other proceeding under this Act, refund of any
amount becomes due to the assessee, the Assessing Office r shall, except as otherwise provided in this Act,
refund the amount to the assessee without his having to make any claim in that behalf:
Provided  that where, by the order aforesaid,—
(a) an assessment is set aside or cancelled and an orde r of fresh assessment is directed to be made, the
refund, if any, shall become due only on the making of such fresh assessment;
(b) the assessment is annulled, the refund shall become due only of the amount, if any, of the tax paid
in excess of the tax chargeable on the total income returned by the assessee.
Power to withhold refund in certain cases.

241. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2001, w .e.f. 1-6-2001. ]
Withholding of refund in certain cases.

241A.  For every assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2017, where refund of any
amount becomes due to the assessee under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 143 and the Assessing
Officer is of the opinion, having regard to the fact that a notice has been issued under sub-section (2) of
section 143 in respect of such return, that the grant of the refund is likely to adversely affect the revenue, hemay, for reasons to be recorded in writing and with  the previous approval of the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner, as the case may be, withhold the refund up to the date on which the assessment is made:
49[Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply from the 1st day of April, 2023.]

49. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
729 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Correctness of assessment not to be questioned.

242. In a claim under this Chapter, it shall not be open to the assessee to question the correctness of any
assessment or other matter decided which has become final and conclusive or ask for a review of the same,and the assessee shall not be entitled to any relief on such claim except refund of tax wrongly paid or paid in
excess.
Interest on delayed refunds.

243. (1) If the Assessing Officer does not grant the refund,—
(a) in any case where the total income of the assesse e does not consist solely of income from interest
on securities or dividends, within three months from the end of the month in which the total income
is determined under this Act, and
(b) in any other case, within three months from the end of the month in which the claim for refund is
made under this Chapter,
the Central Government shall pay the assessee simple interest at fifteen per cent per annum on the amount
directed to be refunded from the date immediately  following the  expiry  of the  period  of  three  months
aforesaid to the date of the order granting the refund.
Explanation. —If the delay in granting the refund within the period of three months aforesaid is attributable
to the assessee, whether wholly or in part, the period of the delay attributable to him shall be excluded from
the period for which interest is payable.
(2) Where any question arises as to the period to be excluded for the purposes of calculation of interest
under the provisions of this section, such questio n shall be determined by the Principal Chief Co mmissioner
or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner whose decision shall be final.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply in respect of any assessment for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989 or any subsequent assessment years.
Interest on refund where no claim is needed.

244. (1) Where a refund is due to the assessee in pursuan ce of an order referred to in section 240 and the
Assessing Officer does not grant the refund within a period of three months from the end of the month in
which such order is passed, the Central Government shal l pay to the assessee simple interest at fifteen per
cent per annum on the amount of  refund due from the date immediately following the expiry of the period of
three months aforesaid to the date on which the refund is granted.
(1A) Where the whole or any part of the refund referred  to in sub-section (1) is due to the assessee, as a
result of any amount having been paid by him after the 31st day of March, 1975, in pursuance of any order
of assessment  or penalty and such amount  or any part  thereof having been found in appeal or otherproceeding under this Act to be in excess of the amount which such assessee is liable to pay as tax orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
730 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
penalty, as the case may be, under this Act, the Central Government shall pay to such assessee simple
interest at the rate specified in sub-section (1) on the amount so found to be in excess from the date on
which such amount was paid to the date on which the refund is granted :
Provided  that where the amount so found to be in excess was paid in instalments, such interest shall be
payable on the amount of each such instalment or any pa rt of such instalment, which was in excess, from the
date on which such instalment was paid to the date on which the refund is granted :
Provided further  that no interest under this sub-section shall be payable for a period of one month from the
date of the passing of the order in appeal or other proceeding :
Provided also  that where any interest is payable to an assessee under this sub-section, no interest under
sub-section (1) shall be payable to him in respect of the amount so found to be in excess.
(2) Where a refund is withheld under the provisions of section 241, the Central Government shall pay
interest at the aforesaid rate on the amount of refund ultimately determined to be due as a result of the
appeal or further proceeding for the period commencing af ter the expiry of three months from the end of the
month in which the order referred to in section 241 is passed to the date the refund is granted.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply in respect of any assessment for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1989, or any subsequent assessment years.
Interest on refunds.

244A.  (1) Where refund of any amount becomes due to the assessee under this Act, he shall, subject to the
provisions of this section, be entitled to receive, in addition to the said amount, simple interest thereon
calculated in the following manner, namely :—
(a) where the refund is out of any tax collected at source under section 206C or paid by way of
advance tax or treated as paid under section 199, during the financial year immediately preceding
the assessment year, such interest shall be calculated at the rate of one-half per cent for everymonth or part of a month comprised in the period,—
(i) from the 1st day of April of the assessment ye ar to the date on which the refund is granted,
if the return of income has been furnished on or before the due date specified undersub-section (1) of section 139; or
(ii) from the date of furnishing of return of income to the date on which the refund is granted,
in a case not covered under sub-clause ( i):
50[Provided  that where refund arises as a result of an order passed by the Assessing Officer in
consequence of an application made by the a ssessee under sub-section (20) of section 155, such
interest shall be calculated at the rate of one-half per cent for every month or part of a month
comprised in the period from the date of such application to the date on which the refund isgranted;]
(aa) where the refund is out of any tax paid under section 140A, such interest shall be calculated at the
rate of one-half per cent for every month or part of a month comprised in the period, from the dateof furnishing of return of income or payment of tax, whichever is later, to the date on which the
refund is granted:
Provided  that no interest under clause ( a) or clause ( aa) shall be payable, if the amount of refund
is less than ten per cent of the tax as determined  under sub-section (1) of section 143 or on regular
assessment;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
731 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) in any other case, such interest shall be calculated at the rate of one-half per cent for every month
or part of a month comprised in the period or peri ods from the date or, as the case may be, dates of
payment of the tax or penalty to the date on which the refund is granted.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, "date of payment of tax or penalty" means the date on and
from which the amount of tax or penalty specified in the notice of demand issued under section 156 is paid
in excess of such demand.
(1A) In a case where a refund arises as a result of giving effect to an order under section 250 or section 254
or section 260 or section 262 or section 263 or sectio n 264, wholly or partly, otherwise than by making a
fresh assessment or reassessment, the assessee shall be entitled to receive, in addition to the interest payable
under sub-section (1), an additional interest on such am ount of refund calculated at the rate of three per cent
per annum, for the period beginning from the date follo wing the date of expiry of the time allowed under
sub-section (5) of section 153 to the date on which the refund is granted:
51[Provided  that where proceedings for assessment or reassessment are pending in respect of an assessee, in
computing the period for determining the additional interest payable to such assessee under this sub-section,
the period beginning from the date on which such ref und is withheld by the Assessing Officer in accordance
with and subject to provisions of sub- section (2) of section 245 and ending 52[with the date up to which such
refund is withheld], shall be excluded.]
(1B) Where refund of any amount becomes due to the deductor in respect of any amount paid to the credit
of the Central Government under Chapter XVII-B, such deductor shall be entitled to receive, in addition to
the said amount, simple interest thereon calculated at the rate of one-half per cent for every month or part of
a month comprised in the period, from the date on which—
(a) claim for refund is made in the prescribed form; or
(b) tax is paid, where refund arises on account of gi ving effect to an order under section 250 or section
254 or section 260 or section 262,
to the date on which the refund is granted.
(2) If the proceedings resulting in the refund are delayed for reasons attributable to the assessee or the
deductor, as the case may be, whether wholly or in part, the period of the delay so attributable to him shall
be excluded from the period for which interest is payable under sub-section (1) or (1A) or (1B), and where
any question arises as to the period to be excluded, it shall be decided by the Principal Chief Commissioneror Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final.
(3) Where, as a result of an order under sub-sectio n (3) of section 115WE or section 115WF or section
115WG or sub-section (3) of section 143 or section 144 or section 147 or section 154 or section 155 or
section 250 or section 254 or section 260 or section 262 or section 263 or section 264 or an order of theSettlement Commission under sub-section (4) of section 245D, the amount on which interest was payable
under sub-section (1) has been increased or reduced, as the case may be, the interest shall be increased or
reduced accordingly, and in a case where the interest is reduced, the Assessing Officer shall serve on theassessee a notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the amount of the excess interest paid and
requiring him to pay such amount; and such notice of demand shall be deemed to be a notice under section
156 and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply in respect of assessments for the assessment year commencing
on the 1st day of April, 1989, and subsequent assessment years :
Provided  that in respect of assessment of fringe benefits, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect
as if for the figures "1989", the figures "2006" had been substituted.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
732 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

50. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-10-2023.

51. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

52. Sub. for "with the date on which such assessment or reassessment is made" by Act No. 15 of 2024,
w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
53[Set off and withholding of refunds in certain cases.

245. (1) Where under any of the provisions of this Act, a refund becomes due or is found to be due to any
person,  the  Assessing Officer  or  Commissioner  or  Principal Commissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner  or
Principal Chief Commissioner, as the case may be, may, in lieu of payment of the refund, set off the amount
to be refunded or any part of that amount, against the sum, if any, remaining payable under this Act by theperson to whom the refund is due, after giving an int imation in writing to such person of the action proposed
to be taken under this sub-section.
(2) Where a part of the refund is set off under the provi sions of sub-section (1), or where no such amount is
set off, and refund becomes due to a person, and the Assessing Officer, having regard to the fact that
proceedings for assessment or reassessment are pending in the case of such person, 
54[***] he may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing and with the pr evious approval of the Principal Commissioner or the
Commissioner, as the case may be, withhold the refund up to 55[sixty days from] the date on which such
assessment or reassessment is made.]

53. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

54. Words "is of the opinion that the grant of refund is likely to adversely affect the revenue," omtt. by
Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

55. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
CHAPTER XIX-A
SETTLEMENT OF CASES
Definitions.

245A.  In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Bench" means a Bench of the Settlement Commission;
(b) "case" means any proceeding for assessment under th is Act, of any person in respect of any
assessment year or assessment years which may be pending before an Assessing Officer on the dateon which an application under sub-section (1) of section 245C is made.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause—
(i) a proceeding for assessment or reassessment or recomputation under section 147 shall be
deemed to have commenced—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
733 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) from the date on which a notice under section 148 is issued for any assessment
year;
(b) from the date of issuance of the notice referred to in sub-clause ( a), for any other
assessment year or assessment years for which a notice under section 148 has not
been issued, but such notice could have been issued on such date, if the return ofincome for the other assessment year or assessment years has been furnished
under section 139 or in response to a notice under section 142;
(ii) [***]
(iii) a proceeding for making fresh assessment in  pursuance of an order under section 254 or
section 263 or section 264, setting aside or cance lling an assessment shall be deemed to
have  commenced  from  the  date  on  which  such  order,  setting aside  or  cancelling anassessment was passed;
(iiia) a proceeding for assessment or reassessment for any of the assessment years, referred to in
clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 153A in cas e of a person referred to in section
153A or section 153C, shall be deemed to have  commenced on the date of issue of notice
initiating such proceeding and concluded on the date on which the assessment is made;
(iv) a  proceeding for  assessment  for  any  assessment  year,  other  than  the  proceedings of
assessment or reassessment referred to in clause ( i) or clause ( iii) or clause ( iiia), shall be
deemed  to  have  commenced  from the  date  on  which  the  return  of  income  for  that
assessment year is furnished under section 139 or in response to a notice served undersection 142 and concluded on the date on which the assessment is made; or on the expiry
of the time specified for making assessment under sub-section (1) of section 153, in case
where no assessment is made;
(c) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Settlement Commission;
(d) "income-tax authority" means an income-tax authority specified in section 116;
(da) "Interim Board" means the Interim Board for Settlement constituted under section 245AA;
(e) "Member"  means a  Member  of  the  Settlement  Commission,  and  includes the  Chairman  and  a
Vice-Chairman;
(ea) "Member of the Interim Board" means a Member of the Interim Board;
(eb) "pending application" means an application which was filed under section 245C and which fulfils
the following conditions, namely: —
(i) it was not declared invalid under sub-section (2C) of section 245D; and
(ii) no order under sub-section (4) of section 245D was issued on or before the 31st day of
January, 2021 with respect to such application;
(f) "Settlement Commission" means the Income-tax Settlement Commission constituted under section
245B;
(g) "Vice-Chairman" means a Vice-Chairman of the Settlement Commission and includes a Member
who is senior amongst the Members of a Bench.
Interim Boards for Settlement.

245AA.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute one or more Interim Boards for Settlement, as may be
necessary, for the settlement of pending applications.
(2)  Every  Interim Board  shall consist  of  three  members,  each  being an  officer  of  the  rank  of  ChiefINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
734 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Commissioner, as may be nominated by the Board.
(3) If the Members of the Interim Board differ in opini on on any point, the point shall be decided according
to the opinion of the majority.
Income-tax Settlement Commission.

245B.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be called the Income-tax Settlement
Commission for the settlement of cases under this Chapter:
Provided that the Income-tax Settlement Commission so cons tituted shall cease to operate on or after the
1st day of February, 2021.
(2) The Settlement Commission shall consist of a Chai rman and as many V ice-Chairmen and other members
as the Central Government thinks fit and shall function within the Department of the Central Governmentdealing with direct taxes.
(2A) [***](3) The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other members of the Settlement Commission shall be appointed by
the Central Government from amongst persons of integrity and outstanding ability, having special knowledge
of, and, experience in, problems relating to direct taxes and business accounts:
Provided  that, where a member of the Board is appointed  as the Chairman, Vice-Chairman or as a member
of the Settlement Commission, he shall cease to be a member of the Board.
Jurisdiction and powers of Settlement Commission.

245BA.  (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
Settlement Commission may be exercised by Benches thereof.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this section, a Bench shall be presided over by the Chairman or a
Vice-Chairman and shall consist of two other Members.
(3) The Bench for which the Chairman is the Presiding Officer shall be the principal Bench and the other
Benches shall be known as additional Benches.
(4)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in  sub-sections  (1)  and  (2),  the  Chairman  may  authorise  the
Vice-Chairman  or  other  Member  appointed  to  one  Bench  to  discharge  also  the  functions  of  the
Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, other Member of another Bench.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, and subject to any rules
that may be made in this behalf, when one of the persons constituting a Bench (whether such person be thePresiding Officer or other Member of the Bench) is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause  or in the  event  of the  occu rrence  of any vacancy either in the  office  of the
Presiding Officer or in the office of one or the othe r Members of the Bench, the remaining two persons may
function as the Bench and if the Presiding Officer of the Bench is not one of the remaining two persons, the
senior among the remaining persons shall act as the Presiding Officer of the Bench :
Provided  that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter, it appears to the Presiding Officer
that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard of by a Bench consisting of threeMembers, the case or matter may be referred by the Pr esiding Officer of such Bench to the Chairman forINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
735 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
transfer to such Bench as the Chairman may deem fit.
(5A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the Chairman may, for
the disposal of any particular case, constitute a Special Bench consisting of more than three Members.
(6) Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, th e places at which the principal Bench and the additional
Benches shall ordinarily sit shall be such as the Ce ntral Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify and the Special Bench shall sit at a place to be fixed by the Chairman.
Vice-Chairman to act as Chairman or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances.

245BB.  (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman by reason of his
death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairmen asthe Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf, shall act as the
Chairman until the date on which a new Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the
Vice-Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairmen as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairman
until the date on which the Chairman resumes his duties.
Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another.

245BC.  On the application of the assessee or the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner and after notice to them, and after hearing such of them as he may
desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending
before one Bench, for disposal, to another Bench:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply on or after the 1st day of February, 2021.
Decision to be by majority.

245BD.  If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point shall be decided according to
the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the
point or points on which they differ, and make a refere nce to the Chairman who shall either hear the point or
points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members of
the  Settlement Commission and such point or points shall be  decided according to the opinion of the
majority of the Members of the Settlement Commission who have heard the case, including those who firstheard it:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply on or after the 1st day of February, 2021.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
736 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Application for settlement of cases.

245C.  (1) An assessee may, at any stage of a case relating  to him, make an application in such form and in
such manner as may be prescribed, and containing a fu ll and true disclosure of his income which has not
been disclosed before  the  Assessing Officer, the  manner in which such income  has been derived, the
additional amount of income-tax payable on such income and such other particulars as may be prescribed, to
the Settlement Commission to have the case settled and any such application shall be disposed of in themanner hereinafter provided :
Provided  that no such application shall be made unless,—
(i) in a  case  where  proceedings for  assessment  or  reassessment  for  any  of  the  assessment  years
referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 153A or clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of
section 153B in case of a person referred to in section 153A or section 153C have been initiated,
the additional amount of income-tax payable on the income disclosed in the application exceedsfifty lakh rupees,
(ia) in a case where—
(A) the applicant is related to the person referred to in clause ( i) who has filed an application
(hereafter in this sub-section referred to as "specified person"); and
(B) the proceedings for assessment or reassessment for any of the assessment years referred to
in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 153A or clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section
153B in case of the applicant, being a person referred to in section 153A or section 153C,
have been initiated,
the additional amount of income-tax payable on the income disclosed in the application exceeds
ten lakh rupees,
(ii) in any other case, the additional amount of income-tax payable on the income disclosed in the
application exceeds ten lakh rupees,
and such tax and the interest thereon, which would have been paid under the provisions of this Act had the
income disclosed in the application been declared in the return of income before the Assessing Officer onthe date of application, has been paid on or before the date of making the application and the proof of such
payment is attached with the application.
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( ia),—
(a) the applicant, in relation to the specified person referred to in clause ( ia), means,—
(i) where the specified person is an individual, any relative of the specified person;
(ii) where the specified person is a company, firm, association of persons or Hindu undivided
family, any director of the company, partner of the firm, or member of the association or
family, or any relative of such director, partner or member;
(iii) any individual who has a substantial interest in the business or profession of the specified
person, or any relative of such individual;
(iv) a company, firm, association of persons or Hindu undivided fa mily having a substantial
interest in the business or profession of the specified person or any director, partner ormember of such company, firm, association or family, or any relative  of such director,
partner or member;
(v) a company, firm, association of persons or Hindu undivided fa mily of which a director,
partner or member, as the  case  may be, has a  substantial interest  in the  business or
profession of the specified person; or any director, partner or member of such company,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
737 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
firm, association or family or any relative of such director, partner or member;
(vi) any person who carries on a business or profession,—
(A) where the specified person being an individual, or any relative of such specified
person, has a substantial interest in the business or profession of that person; or
(B) where  the  specified person being a  company, firm, association of persons or
Hindu undivided fa mily, or any director of such company, partner of such firm or
member of the association or family, or any relative of such director, partner or
member, has a substantial interest in the business or profession of that person;
(b) a person shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in a business or profession, if—
(A) in a case where the business or profession is carried on by a company, such person is, on
the date of search, the beneficial owner of shares (not being shares entitled to a fixed rateof dividend, whether with or without a right to participate in profits) carrying not less than
twenty per cent of the voting power; and
(B) in any other case, such person is, on the date of search, beneficially entitled to not less
than twenty per cent of the profits of such business or profession.
(1A) For the purposes of sub-section (1) of this s ection, the additional amount of income-tax payable in
respect of the income disclosed in an application ma de under sub-section (1) of this section shall be the
amount calculated in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1B) to (1D).
(1B) Where the income disclosed in the application relates to only one previous year,—
(i) if the applicant has not furnished a return in respec t of the total income of that year, then, tax shall
be calculated on the income disclosed in the application as if such income were the total income;
(ii) if the applicant has furnished a return in respect of the total income of that year, tax shall be
calculated on the aggregate of the total income returned and the income disclosed in the application
as if such aggregate were the total income.
(1C) The additional amount of income-tax payable in respect of the income disclosed in the application
relating to the previous year referred to in sub-section (1B) shall be,—
(a) in a case referred to in clause ( i) of that sub-section, the amount of tax calculated under that
clause;
(b) in a case referred to in clause ( ii) of that sub-section, the amount of tax calculated under that
clause as reduced by the amount of tax calculated on the total income returned for that year;
(c) [***].
(1D) Where the income disclosed in the application relates to more than one previous year, the additional
amount  of income-tax payable  in respect  of the  income  disclosed for each of the  years shall first  be
calculated in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1B) and (1C) and the aggregate of the amountso arrived at in respect of each of the years for wh ich the application has been made under sub-section (1)
shall be the additional amount of income-tax payable in respect of the income disclosed in the application.
(1E) [***](2) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.(3) An application made under sub-section (1) shall not be allowed to be withdrawn by the applicant.(4) An assessee shall, on the date on which he makes an application under sub-section (1) to the Settlement
Commission, also intimate the Assessing Officer in the prescribed manner of having made such applicationto the said Commission.
(5) No application shall be made under this section on or after the 1st day of February, 2021.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
738 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Procedure on receipt of an application under section 245C.

245D.  (1) On receipt of an application under section 245C, the Settlement Co mmission shall, within seven
days from the date of receipt of the application, issue a notice to the applicant requiring him to explain as to
why the application made by him be allowed to be proceeded with, and on hearing the applicant, the
Settlement Commission shall, within a period of fourteen days from the date of the application, by an order
in writing, reject the application or allow the application to be proceeded with:
Provided that where no order has been passed within the aforesaid period by the Settlement Commission,
the application shall be deemed to have been allowed to be proceeded with.
(1A) [ Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1991, w.e.f. 27-9-1991. ]
(2)  A copy  of  every  order  under  sub-section  (1)  shall be  sent  to  the  applicant  and  to  the  Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner.
(2A) Where an application was made under section 245C  before the 1st day of June, 2007, but an order
under the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section, as they stood immediately before their amendment by
the Finance Act, 2007, has not been made before the 1st day of June, 2007, such application shall be
deemed to have been allowed to be proceeded with if the additional tax on the income disclosed in such
application and the interest thereon is paid on or before the 31st day of July, 2007.
Explanation. —In respect of the applications referred to in this sub-section, the 31st day of July, 2007 shall
be deemed to be the date of the order of rejection or allowing the application to be proceeded with under
sub-section (1).
(2B) The Settlement Commission shall,—
(i) in respect of an application which is allowed to be proceeded with under sub-section (1), within
thirty days from the date on which the application was made; or
(ii) in respect of an application referred to in sub-section (2A) which is deemed to have been allowed
to be proceeded with under that sub-section, on or before the 7th day of August, 2007,
call for a report from the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, and the Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner shall furnish the report within a period of thirty days of the receipt of communication from
the Settlement Commission.
(2C) Where a report of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner called for under sub-section (2B) has
been furnished within the period specified therein, the Settlement Commission may, on the basis of thereport and within a period of fifteen days of the receipt of the report, by an order in writing, declare the
application in question as invalid, and shall send the c opy of such order to the applicant and the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner:
Provided that an application shall not be declared invalid unless an opportunity has been given to the
applicant of being heard:
Provided further  that where the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner has not furnished the report
within the aforesaid period, the Settlement Commission shall proceed further in the matter without the report
of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner:
Provided also that where in respect of an application, an order, which was required to be passed under this
sub-section on or before the 31st day of January, 2021,  has not been passed on or before the 31st day of
January, 2021, such application shall deemed to be valid.
(2D) Where an application was made under sub-section (1) of section 245C before the 1st day of June, 2007
and an order under the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section, as they stood immediately before their
amendment by the Finance Act, 2007, allowing the a pplication to have been proceeded with, has been
passed before the 1st day of June, 2007, but an order under the provisions of sub-section (4), as they stoodINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
739 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
immediately before their amendment by the Finance Act, 2007, was not passed before the 1st day of June,
2007, such application shall not be allowed to be fu rther proceeded with unless the additional tax on the
income disclosed in such application and the interest  thereon, is, notwithstanding any extension of time
already granted by the Settlement Commission, paid on or before the 31st day of July, 2007.
(3) The Settlement Commission, in respect of—
(i) an application which has not been declared invalid under sub-section (2C); or
(ii) an application referred to in sub-section (2D) which has been allowed to be further proceeded with
under that sub-section,
may call for the records from the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner and after examination of such
records, if the Settlement Commission is of the opinion th at any further enquiry or investigation in the matter
is necessary, it may direct the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner to make or cause to be made such
further enquiry or investigation and furnish a report on the matters covered by the application and any othermatter relating to the case, and the Principal Commissi oner or Commissioner shall furnish the report within a
period of ninety days of the receipt of communication from the Settlement Commission:
Provided that where the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner does not furnish the report within the
aforesaid period, the Settlement Commission may proc eed to pass an order under sub-section (4) without
such report.
(4) After examination of the records and the report of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, if any,
received under—
(i) sub-section (2B) or sub-section (3), or
(ii) the provisions of sub-section (1) as they stood immediately before their amendment by the Finance
Act, 2007,
and after giving an opportunity to the applicant and to the Principal Co mmissioner or Commissioner to be
heard, either in person or through a representative duly authorised in this behalf, and after examining suchfurther  evidence  as  may  be  placed  before  it  or  obtained  by  it,  the  Settlement  Commission  may,  in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, pass such order as it thinks fit on the matters covered by the
application and any other matter relating to the case not covered by the application, but referred to in thereport of the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner.
(4A) The Settlement Commission shall pass an order under sub-section (4),—
(i) in respect of an application referred to in sub-section (2A) or sub-section (2D), on or before the
31st day of March, 2008;
(ii) in respect of an application made on or after the 1st day of June, 2007 but before the 1st day of
June, 2010, within twelve months from the end of the month in which the application was made;
(iii) in respect of an application made on or after the 1st day of June, 2010, within eighteen months
from the end of the month in which the application was made.
(5) Subject to the provisions of section 245BA, the materials brought on record before the Settlement
Commission shall be considered by the Members of the concerned Bench before passing any order under
sub-section (4) and, in relation to the passing of such order, the provisions of section 245BD shall apply.
(6) Every order passed under sub-section (4) shall provide  for the terms of settlement including any demand
by way of tax, penalty or interest, the manner in wh ich any sum due under the settlement shall be paid and
all other matters to make the settlement effective and shall also provide that the settlement shall be void if it
is subsequently found by the Settlement Co mmission that it has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation
of facts.
(6A) Where any tax payable in pursuance of an orde r under sub-section (4) is not paid by the assessee
within thirty-five days of the receipt of a copy of the order by him, then, whether or not the Settlement
Commission has extended the time for payment of such tax or has allowed payment thereof by instalments,the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at one  and one-fourth per cent for every month or part of aINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
740 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
month on the amount remaining unpaid from the date of expiry of the period of thirty-five days aforesaid.
(6B) The Settlement Commission may, with a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record,
amend any order passed under sub-section (4)—
(a) at any time within a period of six months from the end of the month in which the order was passed;
or
(b) at any time within the period of six months from  the end of the month in which an application for
rectification has been made by the Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner or the applicant,as the case may be:
Provided  that  no  application  for  rectification  shall  be  made  by  the  Principal  Commissioner  or  the
Commissioner or the applicant after the expiry of six months from the end of the month in which an order
under sub-section (4) is passed by the Settlement Co mmission:
Provided further that an amendment which has the effect of modifying the liability of the applicant shall
not be made under this sub-section unless the Settlement Co mmission has given notice to the applicant and
the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner of its intention to do so and has allowed the applicant and the
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner an opportunity of being heard.
(7) Where a settlement becomes void as provided under sub-section (6), the proceedings with respect to the
matters covered by the settlement shall be deemed to have been revived from the stage at which theapplication was allowed to be proceeded with by the Settlement Commission and the income-tax authority
concerned, may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, complete such
proceedings at any time before the expiry of two years from the end of the financial year in which thesettlement became void.
(8) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared th at nothing contained in section 153 shall apply to any
order passed under sub-section (4) or to any order of assessment, reassessment or recomputation required to
be made by the Assessing Officer in pursuance of any directions contained in such order passed by theSettlement Commission and nothing contained in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 186 shall apply to
the cancellation of the registration of a firm require d to be made in pursuance of any such directions as
aforesaid.
(9) On and from the 1st day of February, 2021, the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2), (2B), (2C), (3), (4),
(4A), (5), (6) and (6B) shall apply to pending applic ations allotted to Interim Board with the following
modifications, namely:—
(i) for the words "Settlement Commission", wherever they occur, the words "Interim Board" shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the word "Bench", the words "Interim Board" shall be substituted;
(iii) for the purposes of this section, the date referred to in sub-section (2) of section 245M shall be
deemed to be date on which the application was made under section 245C and received by the
Interim Board;
56[(iv)where the time-limit for amending any order or filing of rectification application under sub-section
(6B) expires on or after the 1st day of Februa ry, 2021, but before the 1st day of February, 2022,
such time-limit shall be extended to the 30th day of September, 2023.]
(10) On and from the 1st day of February, 2021, the provi sions of sub-sections (6A) and (7) shall have effect
as if for the words "Settlement Commission", the words "Settlement Commission or Interim Board ofSettlement" had been substituted.
(11) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make a scheme, for the purposes
of settlement in respect of pending applications by the Interim Board, so as to impart greater efficiency,
transparency and accountab ility by—
(a) eliminating the interface between the Interim Board and the assessee in the course of proceedings
to the extent technologically feasible;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
741 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) optimising utilisation of the resources through ec onomies of scale and functional specialisation;
(c) introducing a mechanism with dynamic jurisdiction.
(12) The Central Government may, for the purposes of giving effect to the scheme made under sub-section
(11), by notification in the Official Gazette, direct th at any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply or
shall apply with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the said notification:
Provided that no such direction shall be issued after the 31st day of March, 2023.
(13) Every notification issued under sub-section (11) and sub-section (12) shall, as soon as may be after the
notification is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.

56. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.r.e.f. 1-2-2021.
Power of Settlement Commission to order provisional attachment to protect revenue.

245DD.  (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding before it, the Settle-ment Commission is of the
opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests of the revenue it is necessary so to do, it may, by
order, attach provisionally any property belonging to  the applicant in the manner provided in the Second
Schedule :
Provided  that where a provisional attachment made under section 281B is pending immediately before an
application is made under section 245C, an order under this sub-section shall continue such provisional
attachment up to the period up to which an order made under section 281B would have continued if such
application had not been made :
Provided further  that where the Settlement Commission passes an order under this sub-section after the
expiry of the period referred to in the preceding proviso, the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to such
order as if the said order had originally been passed by the Settlement Commission.
(2) Every provisional attachment made by the Settlement Commission under sub-section (1) shall cease to
have effect after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of the order made under sub-section (1) :
Provided  that the Settlement Commission may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the aforesaid
period by such further period or periods as it thinks fit.
(3) On and from the 1st day of February, 2021, the power of the Settlement Co mmission under this section
shall be exercised by the Interim Board and the provisions of this section shall mutatis mutandis apply to the
Interim Board as they apply to the Settlement Commission.
Power of Settlement Commission to reopen completed proceedings.

245E.  If the Settlement Commission is of the opinion (the reasons for such opinion to be recorded by it in
writing) that, for the proper disposal of the case pending before it, it is necessary or expedient to reopen anyproceeding connected with the case but which has been completed under this Act by any income-taxINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
742 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
authority  before  the  application  under  section  245C  was made,  it  may,  with  the  concurrence  of  the
applicant, reopen such proceeding and pass such order ther eon as it thinks fit, as if the case in relation to
which the application for settlement had been made by the applicant under that section covered such
proceeding also :
Provided  that no proceeding shall be reopened by the Settlement Commission under this section if the
period  between  the  end  of  the  assessment  year  to  which  such  a  proceeding relates and  the  date  of
application for settlement under section 245C exceeds nine years :
Provided further that no proceeding shall be reopened by the Settlement Commission under this section in
a case where an application under section 245C is made on or after the 1st day of June, 2007.
Powers and procedure of Settlement Commission.

245F.  (1) In addition to the powers conferred on the Se ttlement Commission under this Chapter, it shall have
all the powers which are vested in an income-tax authority under this Act.
(2) Where an application made under section 245C has been allowed to be proceeded with under section
245D, the Settlement Co mmission shall, until an order is passed under sub-section (4) of section 245D, have,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of that section, exclusive jurisdiction to exercise the powers and
perform the functions of an income-tax authority under this Act in relation to the case :
Provided that where an application has been made under s ection 245C on or after the 1st day of June, 2007,
the Settlement Commission shall have such exclusive ju risdiction from the date on which the application was
made:
Provided further that where—
(i) an application made on or after the 1st day of  June, 2007, is rejected under sub-section (1) of
section 245D; or
(ii) an application is not allowed to be proceeded with under sub-section (2A) of section 245D, or, as
the case may be, is declared invalid under sub-section (2C) of that section; or
(iii) an application is not allowed to be further proceeded with under sub-section (2D) of section 245D,
the Settlement Commission, in respect of such application shall have such exclusive jurisdiction upto the
date on which the application is rejected, or, not allo wed to be proceeded with, or, declared invalid, or, not
allowed to be further proceeded with, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2 ) and in the absence of any express direction to the
contrary by the Settlement Commission, nothing contained in this section shall affect the operation of any
other provision of this Act requiring the applicant to pay tax on the basis of self-assessment in relation to the
matters before the Settlement Commission.
(4) For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that, in the absence of any express direction by the
Settlement Commission to the contrary, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the operation of the provisions of
this Act in so far as they relate to any matters other than those before the Settlement Commission.
(5) [***](6) [***](7) The Settlement Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to regulate its
own procedure and the procedure of Benches thereof in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers
or of the discharge of its functions, including the places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings.
(8) On and from the 1st day of February, 2021, the powers and functions of the Settlement Co mmissionINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
743 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
under this section shall be exercised or performed, by the Interim Board and all the provisions of this sectio n
shall mutatis mutandis apply to the Interim Board as they apply to the Settlement Commission.
Inspection, etc., of reports.

245G.  No person shall be entitled to inspect, or obtain copies of, any reports made by any income-tax
authority to the Settlement Commission; but the Settlem ent Commission may, in its discretion, furnish copies
thereof to any such person on an application made to it in this behalf and on payment of the prescribed fee :
Provided  that, for the purpose of enabling any person w hose case is under consideration to rebut any
evidence  brought  on  record  against  him in  any  such  report,  the  Settlement  Commission  shall,  on  anapplication made in this behalf, and on payment of the prescribed fee by such person, furnish him with a
certified copy of any such report or part thereof relevant for the purpose:
Provided further that on or after the 1st day of February, 2021, functions of the Settlement Co mmission
under this section shall be performed by the Interi m Board and the provisions of this section shall mutatis
mutandis apply to Interim Board as they apply to the Settlement Commission.
Power of Settlement Commission to grant immunity from prosecution and penalty.

245H.  (1) The Settlement Commission may, if it is satisfied that any person who made the application for
settlement under section 245C has co-operated with the Settlement Co mmission in the proceedings before it
and has made  a full and true  disclosure of his income  and the manner in which such income has been
derived, grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose for the reasons to berecorded in writing, immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act or under the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860) or under any other Central Act for the time being in force and also (either wholly or in
part) from the imposition of any penalty under this Act, with respect to the case covered by the settlement :
Provided  that  no  such  immunity  shall be  granted  by  the  Settlement  Commission  in  cases where  the
proceedings for the prosecution for any such offence have  been instituted before the date of receipt of the
application under section 245C :
Provided further that  the  Settlement  Commission  shall not  grant  immunity from prosecution for  any
offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or under any Central Act other than this Act and the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) to a person who ma kes an application under section 245C on or after the
1st day of June, 2007.
(1A) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) shall stand withdrawn if such person fails to pay
any sum specified in the order of settlement passed under sub-section (4) of section 245D within the timespecified in such order or within such further time as may be allowed by the Settlement Commission, or fails
to comply with any other condition subject to which the immunity was granted and thereupon the provisions
of this Act shall apply as if such immunity had not been granted.
(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1 ) may, at any time, be withdrawn by the Settlement
Commission, if it is satisfied that such person had, in the course of the settlement proceedings, concealed
any particulars material to the settlement or had given false evidence, and thereupon such person may be
tried for the offence with respect to which the immunity was granted or for any other offence of which heappears to have been guilty in connection with the se ttlement and shall also become liable to the impositionINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
744 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
of any penalty under this Act to which such person would have been liable, had not such immunity bee n
granted.
(3) On and from the 1st day of February, 2021, the power of the Settlement Co mmission under this section
shall be exercised by the Interim Board and the provisions of this section shall mutatis mutandis apply to the
Interim Board as they apply to the Settlement Commission.
Abatement of proceeding before Settlement Commission.

245HA. (1) Where—
(i) an application made under section 245C on or af ter the 1st day of June, 2007 has been rejected
under sub-section (1) of section 245D; or
(ii) an  application  made  under  section  245C  has not  been  allowed  to  be  proceeded  with  under
sub-section (2A) or further proceeded with under sub-section (2D) of section 245D; or
(iii) an application made under section 245C has been declared as invalid under sub-section (2C) of
section 245D; or
(iiia) in respect of any application made under sectio n 245C, an order under sub-section (4) of section
245D has been passed not providing for the terms of settlement; or
(iv) in respect of any other application made unde r section 245C, an order under sub-section (4) of
section 245D has not been passed within the time or period specified under sub-section (4A) of
section 245D,
the proceedings before the Settlement Commission shall abate on the specified date.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, "specified date" means—
(a) in respect of an application referred to in clause ( i), the day on which the application was rejected;
(b) in respect of an application referred to in clause ( ii), the 31st day of July, 2007;
(c) in respect of an application referred to in clause ( iii), the last day of the month in which the
application was declared invalid;
(ca) in respect of an application referred to clause ( iiia), the day on which the order under sub-section
(4) of section 245D was passed not providing for the terms of settlement;
(d) in respect of an application referred to in clause ( iv), on the date on which the time or period
specified in sub-section (4A) of section 245D expires.
(2) Where a proceeding before the Settlement Commission abates, the Assessing Officer, or, as the case may
be, any other income-tax authority before whom the pr oceeding at the time of making the application was
pending, shall dispose of the case in accordance with the provisions of this Act as if no application under
section 245C had been made.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), the Assessing Officer, or, as the case may be, other income-tax
authority, shall be entitled to use all the material and other information produced by the assessee before the
Settlement  Commission  or  the  results  of  the  inquiry  held  or  evidence  recorded  by  the  Settlement
Commission in the course of the proceedings before it, as if such material, information, inquiry and evidencehad been produced before the Assessing Officer or other income-tax authority or held or recorded by him in
the course of the proceedings before him.
(4) For the purposes of the time-limit under sections 149, 153, 153B, 154, 155, 158BE and 231 and for the
purposes of payment of interest under section 243 or 244 or, as the case may be, section 244A, for making
the assessment or reassessment under sub-section (2), the period commencing on and from the date of theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
745 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
application to the Settlement Commission under section 245C  and ending with "specified date" referred to i n
sub-section (1) shall be excluded; and where the assessee is a firm, for the purposes of the time-limit for
cancellation of registration of the firm under sub-section (1) of section 186, the period aforesaid shall,
likewise, be excluded.
Credit for tax paid in case of abatement of proceedings .
245HAA .  Where an application made under section 245C on or after the 1st day of June, 2007, is rejected
under sub-section (1) of section 245D, or any other application made under section 245C is not allowed tobe proceeded with under sub-section (2A) of section 245D or is declared invalid under sub-section (2C) of
section 245D or has not been allowed to be further proceeded with under sub-section (2D) of section 245D
or an order under sub-section (4) of section 245D has not been passed within the time or period specified
under sub-section (4A) of section 245D, the Assessing Of ficer shall allow the credit for the tax and interest
paid on or before  the  date  of making the  application or during the  pendency of the  case  before  the
Settlement Commission.
Order of settlement to be conclusive.
245-I.  Every order of settlement passed under sub-section (4) of section 245D shall be conclusive as to the
matters stated therein and no matter covered by such order shall, save as otherwise provided in this Chapter,be reopened in any proceeding under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force.
Recovery of sums due under order of settlement.

245J.  Any sum specified in an order of settlement passed under sub-section (4) of section 245D may, subject
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein, be recovered, and any penalty for default in making
payment of such sum may be imposed and recovered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII, by
the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over the person who made the application for settlement undersection 245C.
Bar on subsequent application for settlement.

245K. (1) Where—
(i) an order of settlement passed under sub-section (4 ) of section 245D provides for the imposition of
a penalty on the person who made the application under section 245C for settlement, on the groundof concealment of particulars of his income; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
746 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) after the passing of an order of settlement under the said sub-section (4) in relation to a case, such
person is convicted of any offence under Chapter XXII in relation to that case; or
(iii) the case of such person was sent back to the Assessing Officer by the Settlement Commission on or
before the 1st day of June, 2002,
then, he or any person related to such person (herein referred to as related person) shall not be entitled to
apply for settlement under section 245C in relation to any other matter.
(2) Where a person has made an application under sect ion 245C on or after the 1st day of June, 2007 and if
such application has been allowed to be proceeded with under sub-section (1) of section 245D, such personor any related person shall not be subsequently entitled to make an application under section 245C.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, "related person" with respect to a person means,—
(i) where such person is an individual, any company in which such person holds more than fifty per
cent of the shares or voting rights at any time, or any firm or association of persons or body of
individuals in which such person is entitled to mo re than fifty per cent of the profits at any time, or
any Hindu undivided fa mily in which such person is a karta;
(ii) where such person is a company, any individual wh o held more than fifty per cent of the shares or
voting rights in such company at any time before the date of application before the Settlement
Commission by such person;
(iii) where such person is a firm or association of persons or body of individuals, any individual who
was entitled to more than fifty per cent of the pr ofits in such firm, association of persons or body of
individuals, at any time before the date of application before the Settlement Commission by suchperson;
(iv) where such person is a Hindu undivided fa mily, the karta of that Hindu undivided fa mily.
Proceedings before Settlement Commission to be judicial proceedings.

245L.  Any proceeding under this Chapter before the Settlement Co mmission shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Option to withdraw pending application.

245M.  (1) With respect to a pending application, the assessee who had filed such application may, at his
option, withdraw such application within a period of three months from the date of commencement of the
Finance Act, 2021 and intimate the Assessing Officer, in the prescribed manner, about such withdrawal.
(2) Where the option under sub-section (1) is not exercised by the assessee within the time allowed under
that sub-section, the pending application shall be deem ed to have been received by the Interim Board on the
date on which such application is allotted or transferred to the Interim Board under sub-section (3).
(3) The Board may, by an order, allot any pending a pplication to any Interim Board and may also transfer,
by an order, any pending application from one Interim Board to another Interim Board.
(4) Where the pending application is allotted to an Interim Board under sub-section (3) or transferred to
another Interim Board subsequently, all the records, documents or evidences, by whatever name called, withINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
747 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the Settlement Commission shall be transferred to such Interim Board and shall be deemed to be the records
before it for all purposes.
(5)  Where  the  assessee  exercises  the  option  under  sub-section  (1)  to  withdraw  his  application,  the
proceedings with respect to the application shall abate on the date on which such application is withdrawn
and  the  Assessing Officer,  or,  as the  case  may  be,  any  other  income-tax  authority  before  whom theproceeding at the time of making the application was pending, shall dispose of the case in accordance with
the provisions of this Act as if no application under section 245C had been made:
Provided that for the purposes of the time-limit under sections 149, 153, 153B, 154 and 155 and for the
purposes of payment of interest under section 243 or 244 or, as the case may be, section 244A, for making
the assessment or reassessment under this sub-section, the period commencing on and from the date of the
application to the Settlement Commission under section 245C and ending with the date referred to in this
sub-section shall be excluded:
Provided further  that  the  income-tax  authority  shall  not  be  entitled  to  use  the  material  and  other
information produced by the assessee before the Settlement Co mmission or the results of the inquiry held or
evidence recorded by the Settlement Commission in the course of proceedings before it:
Provided also that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply in relation to the material and other
information collected, or results of the inquiry held or evidence recorded by the Assessing Officer, or as the
case  may  be,  other  income-tax  authority  during the  course  of  any  other  proceeding under  this  Act
irrespective of whether such material or other information or results of the inquiry or evidence were also
produced by the assessee or the Assessing Officer before the Settlement Co mmission.
CHAPTER XIX-AA
DISPUTE RESOLUTION COMMITTEE IN CERTAIN CASES
Dispute Resolution Committee.245MA.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute, one or more Dispute Resolution Committees, as may
be necessary, in accordance with the rules made under th is Act, for dispute resolution in the case of such
persons or class of persons, as may be specified by the Board, who may opt for dispute resolution under this
Chapter in respect of dispute arising from any variation in the specified order in his case and who fulfils the
specified conditions.
(2) The Dispute Resolution Committee, subject to such c onditions, as may be prescribed, shall have the
powers to reduce or waive any penalty imposable under this Act or grant immunity from prosecution for any
offence punishable under this Act in case of a person whose dispute is resolved under this Chapter.
(2A)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in  section  144C,  upon  receipt  of  the  order  of  the  Dispute
Resolution Committee under this section, the Assessing Officer shall,—
(a) in a case where the specified order is a draft of  the proposed order of assessment under sub-section
(1) of section 144C, pass an order of assessment, reassessment or recomputation; or
(b) in any other case, modify the order of assessment, reassessment or recomputation,
in conformity with the directions contained in the order of the Dispute Resolution Committee within a period
of one month from the end of the month in which such order is received.
(3) The Central Government may make a scheme, by not ification in the Official Gazette, for the purposes of
dispute resolution under this Chapter, so as to impart greater efficiency, transparency and accountab ility
by—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
748 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) eliminating the interface between the Dispute Resolution Committee and the assessee in the course
of dispute resolution proceedings to the extent technologically feasible;
(b) optimising utilisation of the resources through ec onomies of scale and functional specialisation;
(c) introducing a dispute resolution system with dynamic jurisdiction.
(4) The Central Government may, for the purposes of giving effect to the scheme made under sub-section
(3), by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply or
shall apply with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the said notification:
Provided that no such direction shall be issued after the 31st day of March, 2023:
56a[Provided further  that the Central Government may amend any direction, issued under this sub-section
on or before the 31st day of March, 2023, by notification in the Official Gazette.]
(5) Every notification issued under sub-sections (3) and (4) shall, as soon as may be after the notification is
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "specified conditions" in relation to a person means a person who fulfils the following conditions,
namely:—
(I) where he is not a person,—
(A) in respect of whom an order of detention has been made under the provisions of
the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities
Act, 1974 (52 of 1974):
Provided  that—
(i) such order of detention, being an or der to which the provisions of section
9 or section 12A of the said Act do not apply, has been revoked on the
report of the Advisory Board under section 8 of the said Act or beforethe receipt of the report of the Advisory Board; or
(ii) such order of detention being an order to which the provisions of section
9 of the said Act apply, has not been revoked before the expiry of thetime for, or on the basis of, the review under sub-section (3) of section 9,
or  on  the  report  of  the  Advisory  Board  under  section  8,  read  with
sub-section (2) of section 9, of the said Act; or
(iii) such order of detention, being an or der to which the provisions of section
12A of the said Act apply, has not been revoked before the expiry of the
time for, or on the basis of, the fi rst review under sub-section (3) of the
said section, or on the basis of the report of the Advisory Board under
section 8, read with sub-section (6) of section 12A, of the said Act; or
(iv) such order of detention has not been set aside by a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(B) in respect of whom prosecution for any offence punishable under the provisions
of the Indian Penal Code
* (45 of 1860), the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
1967 (37 of 1967), the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985(61 of 1985), the Prohibition of Benami Transactions Act, 1988 (45 of 1988), thePrevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) or the Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003) has been instituted and he has been convicted
of any offence punishable under any of those Acts;
(C) in respect of whom prosecution has been initiated by an income-tax authority for
any offence punishable under the provisions of this Act or the Indian Penal Code
*
(45 of 1860) or for the purpose of enforcement of any civil liab ility under any lawINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
749 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
for the time being in force, or such pers on has been convicted of any such offence
consequent upon the prosecution initiated by an income-tax authority;
(D) who is notified under section 3 of the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to
Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992 (27 of 1992);
(II) such other conditions, as may be prescribed.
(b) "specified order" means such order, including draft order, as may be specified by the Board, and,—
(i) aggregate sum of variations proposed or made in such order does not exceed ten lakh
rupees;
(ii) such order is not based on search initiated under section 132 or requisition under section
132A in the  case  of  assessee  or  any other  person  or  survey under  section 133A or
information received under an agreement referred to in section 90 or section 90A;
(iii) where return has been filed by the assessee for the assessment year relevant to such order,
total income as per such return does not exceed fifty lakh rupees.
56a. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 2790(E), dated 16-7-2024, now read as Act No. 45 of 2023.
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 2790(E), dated 16-7-2024, now read as Act No. 45 of 2023.
CHAPTER XIX-B
ADVANCE RULINGS
Definitions.

245N.  In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "advance ruling" means—
(i) a determination by the Authority in relation to a transaction which has been undertaken or
is proposed to be undertaken by a non-resident applicant; or
(ii) a determination by the Authority in relation to the tax liability of a non-resident arising out
of a transaction which has been undertaken or is proposed to be undertaken by a residentapplicant with such non-resident; or
(iia) a determination by the Authority in relation to the tax liability of a resident applicant,
arising out of a transaction which has been undertaken or is proposed to be undertaken bysuch applicant; and such determination shall include the determination of any question of
law or of fact specified in the application;
(iii) a determination or decision by the Authority in  respect of an issue relating to computation
of  total income  which  is  pending before  any  income-tax  authority  or  the  Appellate
Tribunal and such determination or decision shall include the determination or decision of
any question of law or of fact relating to such computation of total income specified in theapplication;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
750 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iv) a determination or decision by the Authority whether an arrangement, which is proposed
to be undertaken by any person being a resident or a non-resident, is an impermissibleavoidance arrangement as referred to in Chapter X-A or not:
Provided  that  where  an advance  ruling has been pronounced, before  the  date  on which the
Finance  Bill,  2003  receives  the  assent  of  the  President,  by  the  Authority  in  respect  of  an
application  by  a  resident  applicant  referred  to  in  sub-clause  ( ii)  of  this  clause  as  it  stood
immediately before such date, such ruling shall be binding on the persons specified in section 245S;
(b) "applicant" means—
(A) any person who—
(I) is a non-resident referred to in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a); or
(II) is a resident referred to in sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a); or
(III) is a resident referred to in sub-clause ( iia) of clause ( a) falling within any such
class or category of persons as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify; or
(IV) is a resident falling within any such class or category of persons as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; or
(V) is referred to in sub-clause ( iv) of clause ( a),
and makes an application under sub-section (1) of section 245Q;
(B) an applicant as defined in clause ( c) of section 28E of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of
1962);
(C) an applicant as defined in clause ( c) of section 23A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of
1944);
(D) an applicant as defined in clause ( b) of section 96A of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994);
(c) "application" means an application made to the Authority or the Board for Advance Rulings under
sub-section (1) of section 245Q;
(ca) "Board for Advance Rulings" means the Board for Advance Rulings constituted by the Central
Government under section 245-OB;
(d) "Authority" means the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 245-O;
(e) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Authority;
(f) "Member" means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairman and V ice-chairman or a
Member of the Board for Advance Rulings;
(g) "Vice-chairman" means the Vice-chairman of the Authority.
Authority for Advance Rulings.
245-O.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute an Authority for giving advance rulings, to be known as
"Authority for Advance Rulings":
Provided that the Authority shall cease to act as an Authority for Advance Rulings for the purposes of
Chapter V of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) on and from the date of appointment of the CustomsAuthority for Advance Rulings under section 28EA of that Act:
Provided further 
that the Authority so constituted shall cease to operate on and from such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
751 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(1A) On and from the date of appointment of the Cust oms Authority for Advance Rulings referred to in the
proviso to sub-section (1), the Authority shall act as an Appellate Authority, for the purpose of Chapter V of
the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962):
Provided that the Authority shall not admit any appeal agains t any ruling or order passed earlier by it in the
capacity of the Authority for Advance Rulings in relation to any matter under Chapter V of the CustomsAct, 1962 (52 of 1962) after the date of such appointment of the Customs Authority for Advance Rulings.
(2) The Authority shall consist of a Chairman and su ch number of Vice-chairmen, revenue Members and law
Members as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.
(3) A person shall be qualified for appointment as—
(a) Chairman, who has been a Judge of the Supreme C ourt or the Chief Justice of a High Court or for
at least seven years a Judge of a High Court;
(b) Vice-chairman, who has been Judge of a High Court;
(c) a revenue Member—
(i) from the Indian Revenue Service, who is, or is qualified to be, a Member of the Board; or
(ii) from the Indian Customs and Central Excise Service, who is, or is qualified to be, a
Member of the Central Board of Excise and Customs,
on the date of occurrence of vacancy;
(d) a law Member from the Indian Legal Service, who is, or is qualified to be, an Additional Secretary
to the Government of India on the date of occurrence of vacancy.
(4) The terms and conditions of service and the salaries and allowances payable to the Members shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide to the Authority with such officers and employees, as may be
necessary, for the efficient discharge of the functions of the Authority under this Act.
(6) The powers and functions of the Authority may be discharged by its Benches as may be constituted by
the Chairman from amongst the Members thereof.
(6A) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman by reason of his death,
resignation or otherwise, the senior-most Vice-Chairman shall act as the Chairman until the date on which a
new Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisions  of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his
office.
(6B) In case the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause,
the senior-most Vice-Chairman shall discharge the functions of the Chairman until the date on which the
Chairman resumes his duties.
(7) A Bench shall consist of the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman and one revenue Member and one law
Member:
Provided that  where  the  Authority is dealing with an application seeking advance  ruling in any matter
relating to this Act, the revenue Member of the Bench shall be such Member as referred to in sub-clause ( i)
of clause ( c) of sub-section (3).
(8) The Authority shall be located in the National Capita l Territory of Delhi and its Benches shall be located
at such places as the Central Government may, by notification specify.
Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Member.
245-OA.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
752 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman,
Vice-Chairman and other Members of the Authority appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:
Provided  that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Member appointed before the commencement of Part XIV
of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the
rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into force.
Board for Advance Rulings.
245-OB.  (1) The Central Government shall constitute one or more Boards for Advance Rulings, as may be
necessary, for giving advance rulings under this Chapter on or after such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The Board for Advance Rulings shall consist of two members, each being an officer not below the rank
of Chief Commissioner, as may be nominated by the Board.
Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings.

245P.  (1) No proceeding before, or pronouncement of a dvance ruling by, the Authority shall be questioned
or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of theAuthority.
(2) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint, the provisions of this section shall have effect as if for the word "Authority", the words "Board for
Advance Rulings" had been substituted.
Application for advance ruling.

245Q.  (1) An applicant desirous of obtaining an advance ruling under this Chapter or under Chapter V of the
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) or under Chapter IIIA of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) or underChapter V A of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994) may make an application in such form and in such
manner as may be prescribed, stating the question on which the advance ruling is sought.
(2) The application shall be made in quadruplicate an d be accompanied by a fee of ten thousand rupees or
such fee as may be prescribed in this behalf, whichever is higher.
(3) An applicant may withdraw an application within thirty days from the date of the application.(4) Where an application for advance ruling under this Chapter is made before such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint, and in respect of which no order under
sub-section (2) of section 245R has been passed or no advance ruling under sub-section (4) of section 245R
has been pronounced before such date, such application along with all the relevant records, documents ormaterial, by whatever name called, on the file of the Au thority shall be transferred to the Board for Advance
Rulings and shall be deemed to be the records before the Board for Advance Rulings for all purposes:INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
753 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
57[Provided that the applicant may, on or before the 31st day of October, 2024, request the Board for
Advance Rulings in writing that the application so tran sferred may not be proceeded with, if up to the date
of such request, the Board for Advance Rulings has not passed an order under sub-section (2) of section

245R.]

57. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Procedure on receipt of application.