25. (1) Where agricultural produce is attached, the Tax Recovery Officer shall make such arrangements for
the custody, watching, tending, cutting and gathering thereof as he may deem sufficient; and he shall have
power to defray the cost of such arrangements.
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Tax Recovery Officer in this behalf, either in the
order of attachment or in any subsequent order, the defaulter may tend, cut, gather and store the produce
and do any other act necessary for maturing or preserving it; and, if the defaulter fails to do all or any of
such acts, any person appointed  by  the  Tax  Recovery  Officer in  this behalf may, subject  to  the  likeconditions, do all or any of such acts, and the costs in curred by such person shall be recoverable from the
defaulter as if they were included in the certificate.
(3) Agricultural produce attached as a growing crop  shall not be deemed to have ceased to be under
attachment or to require reattachment merely because it has been severed from the soil.
(4) Where an order for the attachment of a growing crop has been made at a considerable time before the
crop is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered, the Tax Recovery Officer may suspend the execution of the
order for such time as he thinks fit, and may, in hi s discretion, make a further order prohibiting the removal
of the crop pending the execution of the order of attachment.
(5) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit of being stored shall not be attached under this rule
at any time less than twenty days before the time at which it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.
Debts and shares, etc.

26. (1) In the case of—
(a) a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument,
(b) a share in a corporation, or
(c) other movable property not in the possession of the defaulter except property deposited in, or in
the custody of, any court,
the attachment shall be made by a written order prohibiting,—
(i) in the case of the debt—the creditor from recovering the debt and the debtor from making payment
thereof until the further order of the Tax Recovery Officer;
(ii) in the case of the share—the person in whose name the share may be standing from transferring the
same or receiving any dividend thereon;
(iii) in the case of the other movable property (except as aforesaid)—the person in possession of the
same from giving it over to the defaulter.
(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some conspicuous part of the office of the Tax Recovery
Officer, and another copy shall be sent, in the case of the debt, to the debtor, in the case of the share, to the
proper officer of the corporation, and in the case of th e other movable property (except as aforesaid), to the
person in possession of the same.
(3) A debtor prohibited under clause ( i) of sub-rule (1) may pay the amount of his debt to the Tax RecoveryINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
879 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Officer, and such payment shall discharge him as effectually as payment to the party entitled to receive the
same.
Attachment of decree.

27. (1) The attachment of a decree of a civil court for the payment of money or for sale in enforcement of a
mortgage or charge shall be made by the issue to the civil court of a notice requesting the civil court to stay
the execution of the decree unless and until—
(i) the Tax Recovery Officer cancels the notice, or
(ii) the Tax Recovery Officer or the defaulter applies to the court receiving such notice to execute the
decree.
(2) Where a civil court receives an application under clause ( ii) of sub-rule (1), it shall, on the application of
the Tax Recovery Officer or the defaulter and subject to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(5 of 1908), proceed to execute the attached decree and apply the net proceeds in satisfaction of the
certificate.
(3) The Tax Recovery Officer shall be deemed to be th e representative of the holder of the attached decree,
and to be entitled to execute such attached decree in any manner lawful for the holder thereof.
Share in movable property.

28. Where the property to be attached consists of the sh are or interest of the defaulter in movable property
belonging to him and another as co-owners, the atta chment shall be made by a notice to the defaulter
prohibiting him from transferring the share or interest or charging it in any way.
Salary of Government servants.

29. Attachment of the salary or allowances of servants of the Government or a local authority may be made
in the manner provided by rule 48 of Order 21 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5
of 1908), and the provisions of the said rule shall, for the purposes of this rule, apply subject to such
modifications as may be necessary.
Attachment of negotiable instrument.

30. Where the property is a negotiable instrument not deposited in a court nor in the custody of a public
officer, the attachment shall be made by actual seizur e, and the instrument shall be brought before the Tax
Recovery Officer and held subject to his orders.
Attachment of property in custody of court or public officer.

31. Where the property to be attached is in the custody of any court or public officer, the attachment shall
be made by a notice to such court or officer, request ing that such property, and any interest or dividend
becoming payable thereon, may be held subject to the further orders of the Tax Recovery Officer by whom
the notice is issued:
Provided  that, where such property is in the custody of a court, any question of title or priority arising
between the Tax Recovery Officer and any other person, not being the defaulter, claiming to be interested in
such property by virtue of any assignment, attachment or otherwise, shall be determined by such court.
Attachment of partnership property.

32. (1) Where the property to be attached consists of an  interest of the defaulter, being a partner, in the
partnership property, the Tax Recovery Officer may make an order charging the share of such partner in the
partnership property and profits with payment of the amount due under the certificate, and may, by the same
or subsequent order, appoint a receiver of the share of  such partner in the profits, whether already declared
or accruing and of any other money which may become due to him in respect of the partnership, and direct
accounts  and  inquiries  and  make  an  order  for  the  sale  of  such  interest  or  such  other  order  as  the
circumstances of the case may require.
(2) The other persons shall be at liberty at any time to redeem the interest charged or, in the case of a sale
being directed, to purchase the same.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
880 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Inventor y.

33. In the case of attachment of movable property by actual seizure, the officer shall, after attachment of the
property, prepare an inventory of all the property attach ed, specifying in it the place where it is lodged or
kept, and shall forward the same to the Tax Recovery Officer and a copy of the inventory shall be delivered
by the officer to the defaulter.
Attachment not to be excessive.

34. The attachment by seizure shall not be excessive, that  is to say, the property attached shall be as nearly
as possible proportionate to the amount specified in the warrant.
Seizure between sunrise and sunset.

35. Attachment by seizure shall be made after sunrise and before sunset and not otherwise.
Power to break open doors, etc.

36. The officer may break open any inner or outer door or window of any building and enter any building in
order to seize any movable property if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such building
contains movable property liable to seizure under the warrant and the officer has notified his authority and
intention of breaking open if admission is not given.  He shall, however, give all reasonable opportunity to
women to withdraw.
Sale
Sale.

37. The Tax Recovery Officer may direct that any movable property attached under this Schedule or such
portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the certificate shall be sold.
Issue of proclamation.

38. When any sale of movable property is ordered by the Tax Recovery Officer, the Tax Recovery Officer
shall issue a proclamation, in the language of the distri ct, of the intended sale, specifying the time and place
of sale and whether the sale is subject to confirmation or not.
Proclamation how made.

39. (1) Such proclamation shall be made by beat of drum or other customary mode,—
(a) in the case of property attached by actual seizure—
(i) in the village in which the property was seized , or, if the property was seized in a town or
city, then, in the locality in which it was seized; and
(ii) at such other places as the Tax Recovery Officer may direct;
(b) in the case of property attached otherwise than by act ual seizure, in such places, if any, as the Tax
Recovery Officer may direct.
(2) A copy of the proclamation shall also be affixed in a conspicuous part of the office of the Tax Recovery
Officer.
Sale after fifteen days.

40. Except where the property is subject to speedy and natural decay or when the expense of keeping it in
custody is likely to exceed its value, no sale of movable property under this Schedule shall, without the
consent in writing of the defaulter, take place until af ter the expiry of at least fifteen days calculated from
the date on which a copy of the sale proclamation was affixed in the office of the Tax Recovery Officer.
Sale of agricultural produce.

41. (1) Where the property to be sold is agricultural produce, the sale shall be held,—
(a) if such produce is a growing crop—on or near the land on which such crop has grown, or
(b) if such produce has been cut or gathered—at or ne ar the threshing floor or place for treading out
grain or the like, or fodder-stack, on or in which it is deposited:INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
881 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided  that the Tax Recovery Officer may direct the sale to be held at the nearest place of public resort,
if he is of opinion that the produce is thereby likely to sell to greater advantage.
(2) Where, on the produce being put up for sale,—
(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person holding the sale, is not offered for it, and
(b) the owner of the produce, or a person authorised to act on his behalf, applies to have the sale
postponed t ill the next day or, if a market is held at the place of sale, the next market day,
the sale shall be postponed accordingly, and shall be th en completed, whatever price may be offered for the
produce.
Special provisions relating to growing crops.

42. (1) Where the property to be sold is a growing crop and the crop from its nature admits of being stored
but has not yet been stored, the day of the sale shall be so fixed as to admit of the crop being made ready for
storing before the arrival of such day, and the sale sh all not be held until the crop has been cut or gathered
and is ready for storing.
(2) Where the crop from its nature does not admit of being stored or can be sold to a greater advantage in an
unripe stage ( e.g., as green wheat), it may be sold before it is cut and gathered, and the purchaser shall be
entitled to enter on the land, and to do all that is necessary for the purpose of tending or cutting or gatheringthe crop.
Sale to be by auction.

43. The property shall be sold by public auction in one or more lots as the officer may consider advisable,
and if the amount to be realised by sale is satisfied by the sale of a portion of the property, the sale shall be
immediately st opped with respect to the remainder of the lots.
Sale by public auction.

44. (1) Where movable property is sold by public auction, the price of each lot shall be paid at the time of
sale or as soon after as the officer holding the sale directs and in default of payment, the property shall
forthwith be resold.
(2) On payment of the purchase-money, the officer holding the sale shall grant a certificate specifying the
property purchased, the price paid and the name of the purchaser, and the sale shall become absolute.
(3) Where the movable property to be sold is a share in goods belonging to the defaulter and a co-owner,
and two or more persons, of whom one is such co-owner, respectively bid the same sum for such property or
for any lot, the bidding shall be deemed to be the bidding of the co-owner.
Irregularity not to vitiate sale, but any person injured may sue.

45. No irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale of movable property shall vitiate the sale, but any
person sustaining substantial injury by reason of such irregularity at the hand of any other person mayinstitute a suit in a civil court against him for compensa tion, or (if such other person is the purchaser) for the
recovery of the specific property and for compensation in default of such recovery.
Negotiable instruments and shares in a corporation.

46. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedul e, where the property to be sold is a negotiable
instrument or a share in a corporation, the Tax Recovery Officer may, instead of directing the sale to be
made by public auction, authorise the sale of such instrument or share through a broker.
Order for payment of coin or currency notes to the Assessing Officer.

47. Where the property attached is current coin or currency notes, the Tax Recovery Officer may, at any
time during the continuance of the attachment, direct that  such coins or notes shall be credited to the Central
Government and the amount so credited shall be dealt with in the manner specified in rule 8.
PART III
ATTACHMENT AND SALE OF IMMOV ABLE PROPERTYINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
882 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Attachment
Attachment.

48. Attachment of the immovable property of the defaulter shall be made by an order prohibiting the
defaulter from transferring or charging the property in any way and prohibiting all persons from taking anybenefit under such transfer or charge.
Service of notice of attachment.

49. A copy of the order of attachment shall be served on the defaulter.
Proclamation of attachment.

50. The order of attachment shall be proclaimed at some  place on or adjacent to the property attached by
beat of drum or other customary mode, and a copy of the order shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of theproperty and on the notice board of the office of the Tax Recovery Officer.
Attachment to relate back from the date of service of notice.

51. Where any immovable property is attached under this Sc hedule, the attachment shall relate back to, and
take effect from, the date on which the notice to pay the arrears, issued under this Schedule, was served
upon the defaulter.
Sale
Sale and proclamation of sale.

52. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may direct that an y immovable property which has been attached, or such
portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the certificate, shall be sold.
(2)  Where  any  immovable  property  is  ordered  to  be  sold,  the  Tax  Recovery  Officer  shall  cause  a
proclamation of the intended sale to be made in the language of the district.
Contents of proclamation.

53. A proclamation of sale of immovable property shall be  drawn up after notice to the defaulter, and shall
state the time and place of sale, and shall specify, as fairly and accurately as possible,—
(a) the property to be sold;
(b) the revenue, if any, assessed upon the property or any part thereof;
(c) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered;
(cc) the reserve price, if any, below which the property may not be sold; and
(d) any other thing which the Tax Recovery Officer considers it material for a purchaser to know, in
order to judge the nature and value of the property.
Mode of making proclamation.

54. (1) Every proclamation for the sale of immovable prope rty shall be made at some place on or near such
property by beat of drum or other customary mode, and a copy of the proclamation shall be affixed on aconspicuous part of the property and also upon a conspicuous part of the office of the Tax Recovery Officer.
(2) Where the Tax Recovery Officer so directs, such proclamation shall also be published in the Official
Gazette or in a local newspaper, or in both; and the cost of such publication shall be deemed to be costs of
the sale.
(3) Where the property is divided into lots for the purpos e of being sold separately, it shall not be necessary
to make a separate proclamation for each lot, unless proper notice of the sale cannot, in the opinion of the
Tax Recovery Officer, otherwise be given.
Time of sale.

55. No sale of immovable property under this Schedule shall, without the consent in writing of the defaulter,
take place until after the expiration of at least thirty days calculated from the date on which a copy of the
proclamation  of  sale  has been  affixed  on  the  property  or  in  the  office  of the  Tax  Recovery  Officer,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
883 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
whichever is later.
Sale to be by auction.

56. The sale shall be by public auction to the highest bidder and shall be subject to confirmation by the Tax
Recovery Officer :
Provided  that no sale under this rule shall be made if the amount bid by the highest bidder is less than the
reserve price, if any, specified under clause ( cc) of rule 53.
Deposit by purchaser and resale in default.

57. (1) On every sale of immovable property, the person declared to be the purchaser shall pay, immediately
after such declaration, a deposit of twenty-five per cent on the amount of his purchase money, to the officer
conducting the sale; and, in default of such deposit, the property shall forthwith be resold.
(2) The full amount of purchase money payable shall be paid by the purchaser to the Tax Recovery Officer
on or before the fifteenth day from the date of the sale of the property.
Procedure in default of payment.

58. In default of payment within the period mentioned in the preceding rule, the deposit may, if the Tax
Recovery Officer thinks fit, after defraying the expenses of the sale, be forfeited to the Government, and theproperty shall be resold, and the defaulting purchaser shal l forfeit all claims to the property or to any part of
the sum for which it may subsequently be sold.
Authority to bid.

59. (1) Where the sale of a property, for which a reserve price has been specified under clause ( cc) of rule
53, has been postponed for want of a bid of an amount not less than such reserve price, it shall be lawful for
an Assessing Officer, if so authorised by the  Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner orPrincipal Commissioner or Commissioner in this behalf, to bid for the property on behalf of the Central
Government at any subsequent sale.
(2) All persons bidding at the sale shall be required to declare, if they are bidding on their own behalf or on
behalf of their principals. In the latter case, they shal l be required to deposit their authority, and in default
their bids shall be rejected.
(3) Where the Assessing Officer referred to in sub-rule (1) is declared to be the purchaser of the property at
any subsequent sale, nothing contained in rule 57 shall apply to the case and the amount of the purchase
price shall be adjusted towards the amount specified in the certificate.
Application to set aside sale of immovable property on deposit.

60. (1) Where immovable property has been sold in execution of a certificate, the defaulter, or any person
whose interests are affected by the sale, may, at any t ime within thirty days from the date of the sale, apply
to the Tax Recovery Officer to set aside the sale, on his depositing—
(a) the amount specified in the proclamation of sale as that for the recovery of which the sale was
ordered, with interest thereon at the rate of one  and one-fourth per cent for every month or part of
a month, calculated from the date of the proclamation  of sale to the date when the deposit is made;
and
(b) for payment to the purchaser, as penalty, a sum equal to five per cent of the purchase money, but
not less than one rupee.
(2) Where a person makes an application under rule 61 for setting aside the sale of his immovable property,
he shall not, unless he withdraws that application, be entitled to make or prosecute an application under this
rule.
Application to set aside sale of immovable property on ground of non-service of notice or irregularity.

61. Where immovable property has been sold in execution of a certificate, such Income-tax Officer as may
be authorised by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner orCommissioner in this behalf, the defaulter, or any person whose interests are affected by the sale, may, atINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
884 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
any time within thirty days from the date of the sale , apply to the Tax Recovery Officer to set aside the sale
of the immovable property on the ground that notice was not served on the defaulter to pay the arrears as
required by this Schedule or on the ground of a material irregularity in publishing or conducting the sale:
Provided  that—
(a) no sale shall be set aside on any such ground unless the Tax Recovery Officer is satisfied that the
applicant has sustained substantial injury by reason of the non-service or irregularity; and
(b) an application made by a defaulter under this rule shall be disallowed unless the applicant deposits
the amount recoverable from him in the execution of the certificate.
Setting aside sale where defaulter has no saleable interest.

62. At any time within thirty days of the sale, the purchaser may apply to the T ax Recovery Officer to set
aside the sale on the ground that the defaulter had no saleable interest in the property sold.
Confirmation of sale.

63. (1) Where no application is made for setting asid e the sale under the foregoing rules or where such an
application is made and disallowed by the Tax Recovery Officer, the Tax Recovery Officer shall (if the fullamount of the purchase money has been paid) make an order confirming the sale, and, thereupon, the sale
shall become absolute.
(2) Where such application is made and allowed, and where, in the case of an application made to set aside
the sale on deposit of the amount and penalty and charge s, the deposit is made within thirty days from the
date of the sale, the Tax Recovery Officer shall make an order setting aside the sale :
Provided  that no order shall be made unless notice of the application has been given to the persons affected
thereby.
Return of purchase money in certain cases.

64. Where a sale of immovable property is set aside, any money paid or deposited by the purchaser on
account of the purchase, together with the penalty, if any, deposited for payment to the purchaser, and such
interest as the Tax Recovery Officer may allow, shall be paid to the purchaser.
Sale certificate.

65. (1) Where a sale of immovable property has become absolute, the Tax Recovery Officer shall grant a
certificate specifying the property sold, and the name of the person who at the time of sale is declared to be
the purchaser.
(2) Such certificate shall state the date on which the sale became absolute.Postponement of sale to enable defaulter to raise amount due under certificate.

66. (1) Where an order for the sale of immovable propert y has been made, if the defaulter can satisfy the
Tax Recovery Officer that there is reason to believe th at the amount of the certificate may be raised by the
mortgage or lease or private sale of such property, or some part thereof, or of any other immovable property
of the  defaulter, the  Tax Recovery Officer may, on  his application, postpone  the  sale  of the  property
comprised in the order for sale, on such terms, and for such  period as he thinks proper, to enable him to raise
the amount.
(2) In such case, the Tax Recovery Officer shall grant a certificate to the defaulter, authorising him, within a
period to be mentioned therein, and notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, to make  theproposed mortgage, lease or sale:
Provided  that all moneys payable under such mortgage, lease or sale shall be paid, not to the defaulter, but
to the Tax Recovery Officer:
Provided also  that no mortgage, lease or sale  under this rule  shall become  absolute until it has been
confirmed by the Tax Recovery Officer.
Fresh proclamation before re-sale.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
885 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

67. Every re-sale of immovable property, in default of  payment of the purchase money within the period
allowed for such payment, shall be made after the i ssue of a fresh proclamation in the manner and for the
period hereinbefore provided for the sale.
Bid of co-sharer to have preference.

68. Where the property sold is a share of undivided immovable property, and two or more persons, of whom
one is a co-sharer, respectively bid the same sum for su ch property or for any lot, the bid shall be deemed to
be the bid of the co-sharer.
Acceptance of property in satisfaction of amount due from the defaulter.

68A.  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Part, an Assessing Officer, duly authorised by
the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner inthis behalf, may accept in satisfaction of the whole or any part of the amount due from the defaulter the
property, the sale of which has been postponed for the reason mentioned in sub-rule (1) of rule 59, at such
price as may be agreed upon between the Assessing Officer and the defaulter.
(2) Where  any property is accepted under sub-rule  (1), the  defaulter shall deliver possession of such
property to the Assessing Officer and on the date the possession of the property is delivered to the Assessing
Officer,  the  property  shall vest  in  the  Central Government  and  the  Central Government  shall,  where
necessary, intimate the concerned Registering Officer appointed under the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of1908), accordingly.
(3) Where the price of the property agreed upon under sub-rule (1) exceeds the amount due from the
defaulter, such excess shall be paid by the Assessing Officer to the defaulter within a period of three months
from the date of delivery of possession of the prope rty and where the Assessing Officer fails to pay such
excess within the period aforesaid, the Central Government shall, for the period commencing on the expiry
of such period and ending with the date of payment of the amount remaining unpaid, pay simple interest at
one-half per cent for every month or part of a month to the defaulter on such amount.
Time limit for sale of attached immovable property.

68B.  (1) No sale of immovable property shall be made unde r this Part after the expiry of seven years from
the end of the financial year in which the order giving rise to a demand of any tax, interest, fine, penalty or
any other sum, for the recovery of which the immovable property has been attached, has become conclusive
under the provisions of section 245-I or, as the case may be, final in terms of the provisions of Chapter XX:
Provided  that the Board may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the aforesaid period for a further
period not exceeding three years:
Providedfurther that where the immovable property is required to be re-sold due to the amount of highest
bid being less than the reserve price or under the circumstances mentioned in rule 57 or rule 58 or where the
sale is set aside under rule 61, the aforesaid period of limitation for the sale of the immovable property shall
stand extended by one year.
(2) In computing the period of limitation under sub-rule (1), the period—
44[(i)commencing on the date on which stay on levy of the said tax, interest, fine, penalty or another
sum was granted by an order or injunction of any  court and ending on the date on which certified
copy of the order vacating the stay was received by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner; or
(ii) commencing on the date on which stay on the proceeding of attachment or sale of the immovable
property was granted by an order or injunction of any court and ending on the date on which
certified  copy  of  the  order  vacating  the  stay  was  received  by  the  jurisdictional  Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner; or ]
(iii) commencing from the date of the presentation of  any appeal against the order passed by the Tax
Recovery Officer under this Schedule and ending on the day the appeal is decided,
shall be excluded :INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
886 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided  that where immediately after the exclusion of the aforesaid period, the period of limitation for the
sale of the immovable property is less than 180 days, such remaining period shall be extended to 180 days
and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly.
(3) Where any immovable property has been attached under this Part before the 1st day of June, 1992, and
the order giving rise to a demand of any tax, intere st, fine, penalty or any other sum, for the recovery of
which the immovable property has been attached, has also become conclusive or final before the said date,
that date shall be deemed to be the date on which the said order has become conclusive or, as the case may
be, final.
(4) Where the sale of immovable property is not made in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (1), the
attachment order in relation to the said property shall be deemed to have been vacated on the expiry of the
time of limitation specified under this rule.
PART IV
APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVER
Appointment of receiver for business.

69. (1) Where the property of a defaulter consists of a business, the Tax Recovery Officer may attach the
business and appoint a person as receiver to manage the business.
(2) Attachment of a business under this rule shall be  made by an order prohibiting the defaulter from
transferring or charging the business in any way an d prohibiting all persons from taking any benefit under
such transfer or charge, and intimating that the busin ess has been attached under this rule. A copy of the
order of attachment shall be served on the defaulter,  and another copy shall be affixed on a conspicuous part
of the premises in which the business is carried on and on the notice board of the office of the Tax RecoveryOfficer.
Appointment of receiver for immovable property.

70. Where immovable property is attached, the Tax Recovery Officer may, instead of directing a sale of the
property, appoint a person as receiver to manage such property.
Powers of receiver.

71. (1) Where any business or other property is attached and taken under management under the foregoing
rules, the receiver shall, subject to the control of the Tax Recovery Officer, have such powers as may be
necessary for the proper management of the property and the realisation of the profits, or rents and profits,
thereof.
(2) The profits, or rents and profits, of such business or other property, shall, after defraying the expenses of
management, be adjusted towards discharge of the arrear s, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the
defaulter.
Withdrawal of management.

72. The  attachment  and management  under the  foregoing rules may be  withdrawn at any time  at  the
discretion of the Tax Recovery Officer, or if the arrear s are discharged by receipt of such profits and rents or
are otherwise paid.
PART V
ARREST AND DETENTION OF THE DEFAULTER
Notice to show cause.73. (1) No order for the arrest and detention in civil prison of a defaulter shall be made unless the Tax
Recovery Officer has issued and served a notice upon the defaulter ca lling upon him to appear before him
on the date specified in the notice and to show cause why he should not be co mmitted to the civil prison,
and unless the Tax Recovery Officer, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied—
(a) that the defaulter, with the object or effect of obstructing the execution of the certificate, has, afterINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
887 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the drawing up of the certificate by the Tax Recovery Officer, dishonestly transferred, concealed,
or removed any part of his property, or
(b) that the defaulter has, or has had since the drawing up of the certificate by the Tax Recovery
Officer, the means to pay the arrears or some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has
refused or neglected to pay the same.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), a warrant for the arrest of the defaulter may be
issued by the Tax Recovery Officer if the Tax Recovery Officer is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that
with the object or effect of delaying the execution of  the certificate, the defaulter is likely to abscond or
leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Tax Recovery Officer.
(3) Where appearance is not made in obedience to a notice issued and served under sub-rule (1), the Tax
Recovery Officer may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defaulter.
(3A) A warrant of arrest issued by a Tax Recovery Officer under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3) may also be
executed by any other Tax Recovery Officer within whose jurisdiction the defaulter may for the time being
be found.
(4) Every person arrested in pursuance of a warrant of arrest under this rule shall be brought before the Tax
Recovery Officer issuing the warrant as soon as practi cable and in any event within twenty-four hours of his
arrest (exclusive of the time required for the journey):
Provided  that, if the defaulter pays the amount entered in the warrant of arrest as due and the costs of the
arrest to the officer arresting him, such officer shall at once release him.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this rule, where the defaulter is a Hindu undivided fa mily, the  karta
thereof shall be deemed to be the defaulter.
Hearing.

74. When a defaulter appears before the Tax Recovery Officer in obedience to a notice to show cause or is
brought before the Tax Recovery Officer under rule 73, the Tax Recovery Officer shall give the defaulter an
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be co mmitted to the civil prison.
Custody pending hearing.

75. Pending the  conclusion of the  inquiry, the  Tax R ecovery Officer may, in his discretion, order the
defaulter to be detained in the custody of such office r as the T ax Recovery Officer may think fit or release
him on his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the Tax Recovery Officer for his appearance when
required.
Order of detention.

76. (1) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry, the Tax Rec overy Officer may make an order for the detention of
the defaulter in the civil prison and shall in that even t cause him to be arrested if he is not already under
arrest:
Provided  that in order to give the defaulter an opportuni ty of satisfying the arrears, the Tax Recovery
Officer may, before making the order of detention, leave the defaulter in the custody of the officer arresting
him or of any other officer for a specified period not exceeding 15 days, or release him on his furnishingsecurity to the satisfaction of the Tax Recovery Officer for his appearance at the expiration of the specified
period if the arrears are not so satisfied.
(2) When the Tax Recovery Officer does not make an order of detention under sub-rule (1) he shall, if the
defaulter is under arrest, direct his release.
Detention in and release from prison.

77. (1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a certificate may be so detained,—
(a) where the certificate is for a demand of an am ount exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees—for a
period of six months, andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
888 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) in any other case—for a period of six weeks:
Provided  that he shall be released from such detention—
(i) on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his dete ntion being paid to the officer-in-charge of the
civil prison, or
(ii) on the request of the Tax Recovery Officer on any ground other than the grounds mentioned in
rules 78 and 79.
(2) A defaulter released from detention under this rule  shall not, merely by reason of his release, be
discharged from his liability for the arrears; but he shall not be liable to be rearrested under the certificate in
execution of which he was detained in the civil prison.
Release.

78. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may order the release of a defaulter who has been arrested in execution of
a certificate upon being satisfied that he has disclosed the whole of his property and has placed it at the
disposal of the Tax Recovery Officer and that he has not committed any act of bad faith.
(2) If the Tax Recovery Officer has ground for believing the disclosure made by a defaulter under sub-rule
(1) to have been untrue, he may order the rearrest of  the defaulter in execution of the certificate, but the
period of his detention in the civil prison shall not in the aggregate exceed that authorised by rule 77.
Release on ground of illness.

79. (1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a defaulter has been issued, the Tax Recovery Officer
may cancel it on the ground of his serious illness.
(2) Where a defaulter has been arrested, the Tax Recovery Officer may release him if, in the opinion of the
Tax Recovery Officer, he is not in a fit state of health to be detained in the civil prison.
(3) Where a defaulter has been committed to the civil prison, he may be released therefrom by the Tax
Recovery Officer on the ground of the existence of any infectious or contagious disease, or on the ground of
his suffering from any serious illness.
(4) A defaulter released under this rule may be rearrest ed, but the period of his detention in the civil prison
shall not in the aggregate exceed that authorised by rule 77.
Entry into dwelling house.

80. For the purpose of making an arrest under this Schedule—
(a) no dwelling house shall be entered after sunset and before sunrise;
(b) no outer door of a dwe lling house shall be broken open unless such dwe lling house or a portion
thereof is in the occupancy of the defaulter and he  or other occupant of the house refuses or in any
way prevents access thereto; but, when the person executing any such warrant has duly gainedaccess to any dwelling house, he may break open the door of any room or apartment if he has
reason to believe that the defaulter is likely to be found there;
(c) no room, which is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, according to the customs of the
country, does not appear in public, shall be entered into unless the officer authorised to make the
arrest has given notice to her that she is at lib erty to withdraw and has given her reasonable time
and facility for withdrawing.
Prohibition against arrest of women or minors, etc.

81. The Tax Recovery Officer shall not order the arrest and detention in the civil prison of—
(a) a woman, or
(b) any person who, in his opinion, is a minor or of unsound mind.
PART VI
MISCELLANEOUSINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
889 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Officers deemed to be actin g judiciall y.

82. Every  Principal  Chief  Commissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner  or  Principal  Commissioner  or
Commissioner, Tax Recovery Officer or other officer acti ng under this Schedule shall, in the discharge of his
functions under this Schedule, be deemed to be acting judicially within the meaning of the Judicial Officers
Protection Act, 1850 (18 of 1850).
Power to take evidence.

83. Every  Principal  Chief  Commissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner  or  Principal  Commissioner  or
Commissioner, Tax Recovery Officer or other officer acting under the provisions of this Schedule shall have
the powers of a civil court while trying a suit for the purpose of receiving evidence, administering oaths,enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the pr oduction of documents.
Continuance of certificate.