39. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 . Prior to its substitution, sub-section (5) read as under :
"(5) The tax referred to in sub-section (7) of section 158BA shall be charged on the total income
determined in the manner specified in sub-section (1) as reduced by the total income referred to in
clause ( ii), clause ( iii) and clause ( iv) of sub-section (1)."

40. Omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 . Prior to its omission, sub-section (6) read as under :
"(6) For the purposes of sub-section (1) and sub-section (5), if the disclosed income under clause ( i)
of sub-section (1) or where the income disclosed in respect of any previous year comprising the block
period, or the returned income or assessed income under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of sub-section (1) or
where the income as determined under clause ( iv), is a loss, it shall be ignored."
Procedure for block assessment.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
620 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
158BC . (1) Where any search has been initiated under section 132 or books of account, other documents or
assets are requisitioned under section 132A, in the case of any person, then,—
(a) the Assessing Officer shall, in respect of search initiated, or books of account or other documents
or any assets requisitioned, on or after the 1st day of September, 2024, issue a notice to such
person, requiring him to furnish within such period,  not exceeding a period of sixty days, as may be
specified in the notice, a  return in the form an d verified in the manner, as may be prescribed,
setting forth his 41[***] undisclosed income, for the block period:
Provided that such return shall be considered as if it was a return furnished under the provisions of
section 139 and notice under sub-section (2) of section 143 shall thereafter be issued:
Provided further that any return of income, required to be furnished by an assessee under this
section and furnished beyond the period allowed in the notice shall not be deemed to be a return
under section 139:
Provided also  that  no notice  under  section 148 is required to  be  issued for  the  purpose  of
proceeding under this Chapter:
Provided also  that a person who has furnished a return under this clause shall not be entitled to
furnish a revised return:
42[Provided also that the time allowed for furnishing a return under this clause may be extended
by a further period of thirty days, where—
(i) in respect of  a previous year  immediately preceding the previous year  in which the
search is initiated or requisition is made, the due date for furnishing the return has not
expired prior to the date of initiation of such search or requisition;
(ii) the assessee was liable for audit under section 44AB for such previous year;
(iii) the accounts (maintained in normal course) of such previous year have not been audited
on the date of issuance of such notice; and
(iv) the assessee requests in writing for extension of time for furnishing such return to get
such accounts audited; ]
(b)the Assessing Officer shall proceed to determine the 43[total undisclosed income ] of the block
period in the manner laid down in section 158BB and the provisions of section 142, sub-sections
(2) and (3) of section 143, section 144, section 145, section 145A and section 145B shall, so far as
may be, apply;
(c)the Assessing Officer, on determination of the 44[total undisclosed income ] of the block period in
accordance with this Chapter, shall pass an order of assessment or reassessment and determine thetax payable by him on the basis of such assessment or reassessment:
Provided that nothing in the provisions of section 144C shall apply in respect of such order:
45[***]
(d) the assets seized under section 132 or requisitioned under section 132A shall be dealt with in
accordance with the provisions of section 132B.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 143 shall not apply to the return furnished under this section.
(3) The Assessing Officer, before issuance of notice under clause ( a) of sub-section (1), shall take prior
approval of the Additional Commissioner or the Additional Director or the Joint Commissioner or the Joint
Director, as the case may be.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
621 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

41. Words "total income, including the" omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

42. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

43. Sub. for "total income including the undisclosed income" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

44. Sub. for "total income" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

45. Omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 . Prior to its omission, second proviso read as under :
"Provided further  that where the order of assessment or reassessment is made in pursuance of
section 158BD, the block period for such assessm ent or reassessment shall be  the  same as that
determined in respect of the person in whose case search was made under section 132, or whose
books of account or other documents or any assets were requisitioned under section 132A, andproceedings under section 158BD were initiated due to such search or requisition, as the case may
be;"
46[Undisclosed income of any other person.

158BD. Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that any undisclosed income belongs to or pertains to or
relates to any person (herein referred to as the "oth er person"), other than the person (herein referred to
as the "specified person" for the purposes of this sect ion) with respect to whom search was initiated under
section 132 or requisition was made under section 132A, then any money, bullion, jewellery, virtual digitalasset or other valuable article or thing or any books of  account or other documents seized or requisitioned
or any other material or information relating to the aforesaid undisclosed income shall be handed over to
the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other person and that Assessing Officer shall proceedunder section 158BC against such other person and the provisions of this Chapter shall apply accordingly:
Provided  that,—
(a) where there is one specified person relevant to such other person, the block period for such other
person shall be the same as that for the specified person; and
(b) where there is more than one specified persons re levant to such other person, the block period for
such other persons shall be the same as that for the specified person in whose case the blockperiod ends on a later date:
Provided further  that in case of such other person, for the purposes of abatement under sub-sections (2)
and (3) of section 158BA, the reference to the date of initiation of the search under section 132 or making
of requisition under section 132A shall be construed as  reference to the date on which such money, bullion,
jewellery,  virtual  digital  asset  or  other  valuable  article  or  thing  or  any  books of  account  or  otherdocuments  seized  or  requisitioned  or  any  other  material  or  information  relating  to  the  aforesaid
undisclosed income were received by the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other person. ]

46. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 . Prior to its substitution, section 158BD read as under :
"158BD. Undisclosed income of any other person. —Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that any
undisclosed income belongs to or pertains to or relates to any person, other than the person withrespect to whom search was made under section 132 or whose books of account or other documents
or any assets were requisitioned under section 132A, then, any money, bu llion, jewellery or otherINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
622 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
valuable article or thing, or assets, or expenditure, or books of account, other documents, or any
information contained therein, seized or requisiti oned shall be handed over to the Assessing Officer
having jurisdiction over such other person and that Assessing Officer shall proceed under section
158BC against such other person and the provisions of this Chapter shall apply accordingly."
Time-limit for completion of block assessment.

158BE.  (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 153, the order under section 158BC shall be passed
within twelve months from the end of the 47[quarter ] in which the last of the authorisations for search under
section 132, or requisition under section 132A, was executed or made, as the case may be:
Provided that in a case where search under section 132 was initiated, or requisition under section 132A was
made,  and  during the  course  of  the  proceedings  for  the  assessment  or  reassessment  of  the  48[total
undisclosed income ] of the relevant block period, any reference under sub-section (1) of section 92CA is
made, the period available for making an order of a ssessment or reassessment in respect of the block period
shall be extended by twelve months:
49[Provided further that in a case where in pursuance to fifth proviso to clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of
section 158BC, the time allowed under the said clause for furnishing return is extended by a further
period of  thirty days, the provisions of  this sub- section shall have effect, as if  for  the words "twelve
months", the words "thirteen months" had been substituted. ]
(2) In computing the period of limitation under sub-section (1), the period (not exceeding one hundred and
eighty days) commencing from the date on which a search is initiated under section 132 or a requisition is
made under section 132A and ending on the date on which the books of account, or other documents ormoney or bullion or jewellery or other valuable article or thing seized under section 132 or requisitioned
under section 132A, as the case may be, are handed over to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over
the assessee, in whose case such search is initiated under section 132 or such requisition is made undersection 132A, as the case may be, shall be excluded:
Provided  that where after exclusion of the period referred to in this sub-section, the period of limitation for
making an order of assessment or reassessment, as the case may be, expires before the end of a month, such
period shall be extended to the end of such month.
(3) The period of limitation for completion of assessmen t or reassessment for the block period in the case of
the other person referred to in section 158BD sh all be twelve months from the end of the 
50[quarter ] in
which the notice under section 158BC in pursuance of section 158BD, was issued to such other person:
Provided  that in case where during the course of the pr oceedings for the assessment of undisclosed income
of the block period in case of other person referred to in section 158BD, a reference under sub-section (1) of
section 92CA is made, the period available for making an order of assessment in respect of the block period
in case of such other person shall be extended by twelve months:
51[Provided further that in a case where in pursuance to fifth proviso to clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of
section 158BC, the time allowed under the said clause for furnishing return is extended by a furtherperiod of  thirty days, the provisions of  this sub- section shall have effect, as if  for  the words "twelve
months", the words "thirteen months" had been substituted. ]
(4) In computing the period of limitation under this section, the following period shall be excluded,—
52[(i)the period commencing on the date on which stay on assessment proceedings was granted by an
order or injunction of  any court and ending on the date on which certified copy of  the order
vacating the stay was received by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner or Commissioner;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
623 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
or]
(ii) the period commencing from the date on which a reference or first of the references for exchange
of information is made by an authority competen t under an agreement referred to in section 90 or
section 90A and ending with the date on which the information requested is last received by the
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner or a period of one year, whichever is less; or
(iii) the time taken in reopening the whole or any part  of the proceeding or giving an opportunity to the
assessee to be re-heard under the proviso to section 129; or
(iv) the period commencing from the date on which th e Assessing Officer directs the assessee to get his
accounts audited or inventory valued under sub-section (2A) of section 142 and—
(a) ending with the last date on which the assesse e is required to furnish a report of such audit
or inventory valuation under that sub-section; or
(b) where such direction is challenged before a c ourt, ending with the date on which the order
setting aside such direction is received by the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner; or
(v) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing Officer makes a reference to the
V aluation Officer under sub-section (1) of section 142A and ending with the date on which the
report of the V aluation Officer is received by the Assessing Officer; or
(vi) the  period  commencing from the  date  on  which  the  Assessing Officer  intimates  the  Central
Government or the prescribed authority, the contravention of the provisions of clause ( 21) o r
clause ( 22B) or clause ( 23A) or clause ( 23B) of section 10, under sub-clause ( i) of the first proviso
to  sub-section  (3)  of  section  143  and  ending with  the  date  on  which  the  copy  of  the  orderwithdrawing the approval or rescinding the notific ation, as the case may be, under those clauses is
received by the Assessing Officer; or
(vii) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing Officer makes a reference to the
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner under the second proviso to sub-section (3) of section
143 and ending with the date on which the copy of the order under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of the
fifteenth proviso to clause ( 23C) of section 10 or clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of sub-section (4) of
section 12AB, as the case may be, is received by the Assessing Officer; or
(viii) the period commencing from the date on which a re ference for declaration of an arrangement to be
an  impermissible  avoidance  arrangement  is  received  by  the  Principal  Commissioner  orCommissioner under sub-section (1) of section 144BA and ending on the date on which a direction
under sub-section (3) or sub-section (6) or an order under sub-section (5) of the said section is
received by the Assessing Officer; or
(ix) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before the Authority for
Advance Rulings or before the Board for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Q
and ending with the date on which the order reject ing the application is received by the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section 245R; or
(x) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before the Authority for
Advance Rulings or before the Board for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 245Qand ending with the date on which the advance ru ling pronounced by it is received by the Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner under sub-section (7) of section 245R:
Provided that  where  immediately  after  the  exclusion  of  the  aforesaid  period,  the  period  of  limitation
referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) ava ilable to the Assessing Officer for making an order under
clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section 158BC is less th an sixty days, such remaining period shall be
extended to sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly:
Provided further  that where after extension of the period referred to in the first proviso, the period of
limitation for making an order of assessment or reassessment, as the case may be, expires before the end of a
month, such period shall be extended to the end of such month.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
624 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

47. Sub. for "month" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

48. Sub. for "total income" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

49. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

50. Sub. for "month" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

51. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

52. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024  Prior to its substitution, clause ( i) read as under:
"(i) the period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an order or injunction of any
court; or"
Certain interests and penalties not to be levied or imposed.

158BF.  No interest under section 234A, 234B or 234C or penalty under section 270A shall be levied or
imposed upon the assessee in respect of the undisclosed income assessed or reassessed for the block period.
Levy of interest and penalty in certain cases.

158BFA.  (1) Where the return of 53[undisclosed income ] for the block period, in respect of search initiated
under section 132, or books of account, other documents or any assets requisitioned under section 132A, onor after the 1st day of September, 2024, as required by a notice under clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of section
158BC, is not furnished within the time specified in such notice, or is not furnished, the assessee shall be
liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one and one-half per cent of the tax on undisclosed incomedetermined under clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section 158BC, for every month or part of a month
comprised in the period commencing on the day immediately following the expiry of the time specified in
the notice, and ending on the date of completion of assessment under clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section

158BC.
(2) The Assessing Officer or the Commissioner (Appeal s) in the course of any proceedings under this
Chapter, may direct that the person shall pay by way of penalty a sum which shall be equal to fifty per cent
of tax so leviable in respect of the undisclosed inco me determined by the Assessing Officer under clause ( c)
of sub-section (1) of section 158BC:
Provided  that no order imposing penalty under this section or sub-section (1) of section 271AAD or section
271D or section 271DA or section 271E shall be made for the block period in respect of a person if—
(i) such person has furnished a return under clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of section 158BC;
(ii) the tax payable on the basis of such return has been paid or, if the assets seized consist of money,
the assessee offers the money so seized to be adjusted against the tax payable;
(iii) evidence of tax paid is furnished along with the return; and
(iv) an appeal is not filed against the assessment of that part of income which is shown in the return:
Provided further  that the provisions of the first proviso shall not apply where the undisclosed income
determined by the Assessing Officer is in excess of the income shown in the return and in such cases the
penalty shall be imposed on that portion of undisclosed income determined which is in excess of the amountof income shown in the return.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
625 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(3) No order imposing a penalty under sub-section (2) shall be made,—
(a) unless an assessee has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard;
(b) by the  Deputy Commissioner or Assistant  Commissioner or the  Deputy Director or Assistant
Director, as the case may be, where the amount of penalty exceeds two lakh rupees except with the
previous  approval  of  the  Additional  Commissioner  or  the  Additional  Director  or  the  Joint
Commissioner or the Joint Director, as the case may be;
(c) in a case where the assessment is the subject-m atter of an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals)
under section 246A or an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under section 253, after the expiry of
the financial year in which the proceedings, in the course of which action for the imposition of
penalty has been initiated, are completed, or six m onths from the end of the financial year in which
the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the case may be, the Appellate Tribunal is received
by the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, whichever period expires later;
(d) in a case where the assessment is the subject-matter of revision under section 263, after the expiry
of six months from the end of the financial year in which such order of revision is passed;
(e) in any case other than those mentioned in clause ( c) and clause ( d), after the expiry of the financial
year in which the proceedings, in the course of  which notice for the imposition of penalty has been
issued, are  completed, or six months from the  end of the  financial year in which notice  for
imposition of penalty is issued, whichever period expires later.
(4) In computing the period of limitation under this section, the following period shall be excluded—
(i) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard under the proviso to section
129; or
54[(ii)the period commencing on the date on which stay on the proceeding under sub-section (2) was
granted by an order or injunction of any court and ending on the date on which certified copy of
the  order  vacating  the  stay  was  received  by  the  jurisdictional  Principal  Commissioner  or
Commissioner: ]
Provided that  where  immediately  after  the  exclusion  of  the  aforesaid  period,  the  period  of  limitation
referred to in sub-section (3) available to the Assessi ng Officer for making an order under sub-section (2) of
this section is less than sixty days, such remaining pe riod shall be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid
period of limitation shall be deemed to be extended accordingly:
Provided further that where after exclusion of the period refe rred to in the first proviso, the period of
limitation for making of an order for imposition of penalty expires before the end of a month, such periodshall be extended to the end of such month.
(5) An income-tax authority on making an order under sub-section (2) imposing a penalty, unless he is
himself an Assessing Officer, shall forthwith send a copy of such order to the Assessing Officer.

53. Sub. for "total income including undisclosed income" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .

54. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.r.e.f. 1-9-2024 . Prior to its substitution, clause ( ii) read as under:
"(ii)  the  period  during which  the  proceedings under  sub-section  (2)  are  stayed by  an  order  or
injunction of any court:"INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
626 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Authorit y competent to make assessment of block period .

158BG.  The order of assessment for the block period shal l be passed by an Assessing Officer not below the
rank of a Deputy Commissioner or an Assistant Commissione r or a Deputy Director or an Assistant Director,
as the case may be:
Provided  that no such order shall be passed without  the previous approval of the Additional Co mmissioner
or the Additional Director or the Joint Commissioner or the Joint Director, as the case may be, in respect of
search initiated under section 132, or books of account, other documents or any assets requisitioned undersection 132A, on or after the 1st day of September, 2024.
Application of other provisions of this Act.

158BH.  Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all ot her provisions of this Act shall apply to assessment
made under this Chapter.
Chapter not to apply in certain circumstances.

158BI.
54a[Omitted by the Finance Act, 2025, w .r.e.f. 1-9-2024 .]
54a. Prior to its omission, section 158BI read as under :
"158BI. Chapter not to apply in certain circumstances. —The provisions of this Chapter shall not
apply where a search was initiated under section 132, or books of account, other documents or anyassets were requisitioned under section 132A, before the 1st day of September, 2024, and proceedings
in relation to such search or requisition, as the case may be, shall be governed by the other provisions
of this Act".
CHAPTER XV
LIABILITY IN SPECIAL CASES
A.—Legal representatives
Legal representatives.

159. (1) Where a person dies, his legal representative shall be liable to pay any sum which the deceased
would have been liable to pay if he had not died, in the like manner and to the same extent as the deceased.
(2) For the purpose of making an assessment (including an assessment, reassessment or recomputation underINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
627 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
section 147) of the income of the deceased and for the purpose of levying any sum in the hands of the lega l
representative in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1),—
(a) any proceeding taken against the deceased before his death shall be deemed to have been taken
against the legal representative and may be cont inued against the legal representative from the
stage at which it stood on the date of the death of the deceased;
(b) any proceeding which could have been taken against the deceased if he had survived, may be taken
against the legal representative; and
(c) all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(3) The legal representative of the deceased shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be an assessee.
(4) Every legal representative shall be personally liable for any tax payable by him in his capacity as legal
representative if, while his liability for tax remains undischarged, he creates a charge on or disposes of or
parts with any assets of the estate of the deceased, which are in, or may come into, his possession, but such
liability shall be limited to the value of the asset so charged, disposed of or parted with.
(5) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 161, se ction 162, and section 167, shall, so far as may be and
to the extent to which they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, apply in relation to a legal
representative.
(6) The liability of a legal representative under this section shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (4)
and sub-section (5), be limited to the extent to which the estate is capable of meeting the liability.
B.—Representative assessees - General provisions
Representative assessee.

160. (1) For the purposes of this Act, "representative assessee" means—
(i) in respect of the income of a non-resident specified in sub-section (1) of section 9, the agent of the
non-resident, including a person who is treated as an agent under section 163;
(ii) in respect of the income of a minor, lunatic or idiot, the guardian or manager who is entitled to
receive or is in receipt of such income on behalf of such minor, lunatic or idiot;
(iii) in respect of income which the Court of Wards, the Administrator- General, the Official Trustee or
any receiver or manager (including any person, whatever his designation, who in fact manages
property on behalf of another) appointed by or under any order of a court, receives or is entitled to
receive, on behalf or for the benefit of any person, such Court of Wards, Administrator-General,Official Trustee, receiver or manager;
(iv) in  respect  of  income  which  a  trustee  appointed  under  a  trust  declared  by  a  duly  executed
instrument in writing whether testamentary or otherwise [including any wakf deed which is validunder the Mussalman Wakf V alidating Act, 1913 (6 of 1913),] receives or is entitled to receive on
behalf or for the benefit of any person, such trustee or trustees;
(v) in respect of income which a trustee appointed under an  oral trust receives or is entitled to receive
on behalf or for the benefit of any person, such trustee or trustees.
Explanation 1. —A trust which is not declared by a duly executed instrument in writing [including any wakf
deed which is valid under the Mussalman Wakf V alidating Act, 1913 (6 of 1913), shall be deemed, for the
purposes of clause ( iv), to be a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing if a statement in
writing, signed by the trustee or trustees, setting out th e purpose or purposes of the trust, particulars as to the
trustee or trustees, the beneficiary or beneficiaries and the trust property, is forwarded to the Assessing
Officer,—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
628 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(i) where the trust has been declared before the 1st day of June, 1981, within a period of three months
from that day; and
(ii) in any other case, within three months from the date of declaration of the trust.
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of clause ( v), "oral trust" means a trust which is not declared by a duly
executed  instrument  in  writing [including any  wakf  deed  which  is  valid  under  the  Mussalman  Wakf
V alidating Act, 1913 (6 of 1913),] and which is not deemed under Explanation 1  to be a trust declared by a
duly executed instrument in writing.
(2) Every representative assessee shall be deemed to be an assessee for the purposes of this Act.
Liability of representative assessee.

161. (1) Every representative assessee, as regards the income in respect of which he is a representative
assessee, shall be subject to the same duties, responsib ilities and liabilities as if the income were income
received by or accruing to or in favour of him benefi cially, and shall be liable to assessment in his own name
in  respect  of  that  income;  but  any  such  assessment  shall be  deemed  to  be  made  upon  him  in  his
representative capacity only, and the tax shall, subject to the other provisions contained in this Chapter, belevied upon and recovered from him in like manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable upon and
recoverable from the person represented by him.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any income in respect of which the
person mentioned in clause ( iv) of sub-section (1) of section 160 is liable as representative assessee consists
of, or includes, profits and gains of business, tax shall be charged on the whole of the income in respect of
which such person is so liable at the maximum marginal rate :
Provided  that the provisions of this sub-section shall not  apply where such profits and gains are receivable
under a trust declared by any person by will exclusively for the benefit of any relative dependent on him forsupport and maintenance, and such trust is the only trust so declared by him.
(2) Where any person is, in respect of any income, assessable under this Chapter in the capacity of a
representative assessee, he shall not, in respect of th at income, be assessed under any other provision of this
Act.
Right of representative assessee to recover tax paid.

162. (1) Every representative assessee who, as such, pays any sum under this Act, shall be entitled to
recover the sum so paid from the person on whose behalf it is paid, or to retain out of any moneys that maybe in his possession or may come to him in his representative capacity, an amount equal to the sum so paid.
(2) Any representative assessee, or any person who apprehends that he may be assessed as a representative
assessee, may retain out of any money payable by him to  the person on whose behalf he is liable to pay tax
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the principal), a sum equal to his estimated liability under this
Chapter, and in the event of any disagreement between the principal and such representative assessee or
person as to the amount to be so retained, such re presentative assessee or person may secure from the
Assessing Officer a certificate stating the amount to be  so retained pending final settlement of the liab ility,
and the certificate so obtained shall be his warrant for retaining that amount.
(3) The amount recoverable from such representative assessee or person at the time of final settlement shallINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
629 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
not exceed the amount specified in such certificate, except to the extent to which such representative
assessee or person may at such time have in his hands additional assets of the principal.
C.—Representative assessees - Special cases
Who may be regarded as agent.

163. (1) For the purposes of this Act, "agent", in relation to a non-resident, includes any person in India—
(a) who is employed by or on behalf of the non-resident; or
(b) who has any business connection with the non-resident; or
(c) from or through whom the non-resident is in receipt of any income, whether directly or indirectly;
or
(d) who is the trustee of the non-resident;
and includes also any other person who, whether a resident or non-resident, has acquired by means of a
transfer, a capital asset in India :
Provided  that a broker in India who, in respect of any tran sactions, does not deal directly with or on behalf
of a non-resident principal but deals with or through a non-resident broker shall not be deemed to be an
agent under this section in respect of such transactions, if the following conditions are fulf illed, namely:—
(i) the transactions are  carried on in the  ordinary course of business through the first-mentioned
broker; and
(ii) the non-resident broker is carrying on such transactions in the ordinary course of his business and
not as a principal.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the expr ession "business connection" shall have the
meaning assigned to it in Explanation 2 to clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 9 of this Act.
(2) No person shall be treated as the agent of a non-resident unless he has had an opportunity of being heard
by the Assessing Officer as to his liability to be treated as such.
Charge of tax where share of beneficiaries unknown.

164. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), where any income in respect of which the
persons mentioned in clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of sub-section (1) of section 160 are liable as representative
assessees or any part thereof is not specifically receivab le on behalf or for the benefit of any one person or
where the individual shares of the persons on whose be half or for whose benefit such income or such part
thereof is receivable are indeterminate or unknown (such income, such part of the income and such persons
being  hereafter  in  this  section  referred  to  as  "relevant  income",  "part  of  relevant  income"  and"beneficiaries", respectively), tax shall be charged on the relevant income or part of relevant income at the
maximum marginal rate :
Provided  that in a case where—
(i) none of the beneficiaries has any other income chargeable under this Act exceeding the maximum
amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an association of persons or is a beneficiary under any
other trust; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
630 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) the relevant income or part of relevant income is receivable under a trust declared by any person
by will and such trust is the only trust so declared by him; or
(iii) the relevant income or part of relevant income is receivable under a trust created before the 1st day
of March, 1970, by a non-testamentary instrument and the Assessing Officer is satisfied, having
regard to all the circumstances existing at the relevant time, that the trust was created bona fide
exclusively for the benefit of the relatives of the settlor, or where the settlor is a Hindu undivided
family, exclusively for the benefit of the members of such family, in circumstances where such
relatives or members were mainly dependent on the settlor for their support and maintenance; or
(iv) the relevant income is receivable by the trustees on behalf of a provident fund, superannuation
fund, gratuity fund, pension fund or any other fund created bona fide  by a person carrying on a
business  or  profession  exclusively  for  the  benefit  of  persons  employed  in  such  business  orprofession,
tax shall be charged on the relevant income or part of relevant income as if it were the total income of an
association of persons :
Provided further  that  where  any  income  in  respect  of  which  the  person  mentioned  in  clause  ( iv) o f
sub-section (1) of section 160 is liable as representative  assessee consists of, or includes, profits and gains of
business, the  preceding proviso shall apply only if such profits and gains are  receivable  under a  trust
declared by any person by will exclusively for the benefit of any relative dependent on him for support and
maintenance, and such trust is the only trust so declared by him.
(2) In the case of relevant income which is derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable or
religious purposes, or which is of the nature referred to in sub-clause ( iia) of clause ( 24) of section 2, or
which is of the nature referred to in sub-section (4A) of section 11, tax shall be charged on so much of the
relevant income as is not exempt under section 11 or section 12, as if the relevant income not so exempt
were the income of an association of persons :
Provided  that in a case where the whole or any part of the relevant income is not exempt under section 11
or section 12 by virtue of the provisions contained in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub-section (1) of section 13,
tax shall be charged on the relevant income or part of relevant income at the maximum marginal rate.
(3) In a case where the relevant income is derived fr om property held under trust in part only for charitable
or religious purposes or is of the nature referred to in sub-clause ( iia) of clause ( 24) of section 2 or is of the
nature referred to in sub-section (4A) of section 11, and either the relevant income applicable to purposes
other than charitable or religious purposes (or any part thereof) is not specifically receivable on behalf or for
the benefit of any one person or the individual shares of the beneficiaries in the income so applicable are
indeterminate or unknown, the tax chargeable on the relevant income shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the tax which would be chargeable on that part of the relevant income which is applicable to
charitable or religious purposes (as reduced by the income, if any, which is exempt under section
11) as if such part (or such part as so reduced) were the total income of an association of persons;
and
(b) the tax on that part of the relevant income which is applicable to purposes other than charitable or
religious purposes, and which is either not specifica lly receivable on behalf or for the benefit of any
one person or in respect of which the shares of the beneficiaries are indeterminate or unknown, atthe maximum marginal rate :
Provided  that in a case where—
(i) none of the beneficiaries in respect of the part of the relevant income which is not applicable to
charitable or religious purposes has any other income chargeable under this Act exceeding themaximum amount not chargeable to tax in the case of an association of persons or is a beneficiary
under any other trust; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
631 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) the relevant income is receivable under a trust declared by any person by will and such trust is the
only trust so declared by him; or
(iii) the relevant income is receivable under a trust created before the 1st day of March, 1970, by a
non-testamentary  instrument  and  the  Assessing Officer  is  satisfied,  having regard  to  all  the
circumstances existing at the relevant time, that th e trust, to the extent it is not for charitable or
religious purposes, was created bona fide  exclusively for the benefit of the relatives of the settlor,
or where the settlor is a Hindu undivided fa mily, exclusively for the benefit of the members of such
family, in circumstances where such relatives or members were mainly dependent on the settlor fortheir support and maintenance,
tax shall be charged on the relevant income as if the relevant income (as reduced by the income, if any,
which is exempt under section 11) were the total income of an association of persons :
Provided further  that where the relevant income consists of, or includes, profits and gains of business, the
preceding proviso shall apply only if the income is receivable under a trust declared by any person by will
exclusively for the benefit of any relative dependent on him for support and maintenance, and such trust is
the only trust so declared by him :
Provided also  that in a case where the whole or any part of the relevant income is not exempt under section
11 or section 12 by virtue of the provisions contained in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub-section (1) of section
13, tax shall be charged on the relevant income or part of relevant income at the maximum marginal rate.
Explanation1.— For the purposes of this section,—
(i) any income in respect of which the persons mentioned in clause ( iii) and clause ( iv) of sub-section
(1) of section 160 are liable as representative assessee or any part thereof shall be deemed as beingnot specifically receivable on behalf or for the benefit of any one person unless the person on
whose  behalf or for whose  benefit such income or such part thereof is receivable  during the
previous year is expressly stated in the order of th e court or the instrument of trust or wakf deed, as
the case may be, and is identifiable as such on the date of such order, instrument or deed ;
(ii) the individual shares of the persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit such income or such part
thereof is received shall be deemed to be indeterminate or unknown unless the individual shares ofthe persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit such income or such part thereof is receivable,
are expressly stated in the order of the court or the instrument of trust or wakf deed, as the case
may be, and are ascertainable as such on the date of such order, instrument or deed.
Explanation 2. — [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1989 .]
Charge of tax in case of oral trust.

164A.  Where a trustee receives or is entitled to receiv e any income on behalf or for the benefit of any
person under an oral trust, then, notwithstanding anythi ng contained in any other provision of this Act, tax
shall be charged on such income at the maximum marginal rate.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) [***]
(ii) "oral trust" shall have the meaning assigned to it in Explanation 2  below sub-section (1) of section

160.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
632 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Case where part of trust income is char geable .

165. Where part only of the income of a trust is char geable under this Act, that proportion only of the
income receivable by a beneficiary from the trust whic h the part so chargeable bears to the whole income of
the trust shall be deemed to have been derived from that part.
D.—Representative assessees - Miscellaneous provisions
Direct assessment or recovery not barred.

166. Nothing in the foregoing sections in this Chapter shall prevent either the direct assessment of the person
on whose behalf or for whose benefit income therein re ferred to is receivable, or the recovery from such
person of the tax payable in respect of such income.
Remedies against property in cases of representative assessees.

167. The Assessing Officer shall have the same remedies against all property of any kind vested in or under
the control or management of any representative assessee as he would have against the property of any
person liable to pay any tax, and in as full and ample a manner, whether the demand is raised against therepresentative assessee or against the beneficiary direct.
DD.—Firms, association of persons and body of individuals
Charge of tax in the case of a firm.

167A.  In the case of a firm which is assessable as a firm, tax shall be charged on its total income at the rate
as specified in the Finance Act of the relevant year.
Charge of tax where shares of members in association of persons or body of individuals unknown, etc.

167B.  (1) Where the individual shares of the members of an association of persons or body of individuals
(other than a company or a co-operative society or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 (21 of 1860) or under any law corresponding to that Ac t in force in any part of India) in the whole or
any part of the income of such association or body  are indeterminate or unknown, tax shall be charged on
the total income of the association or body at the maximum marginal rate :
Provided  that, where the total income of any member of su ch association or body is chargeable to tax at a
rate  which  is higher than the  maximum marginal rate,  tax  shall be  charged on  the  total income  of the
association or body at such higher rate.
(2) Where, in the case of an association of persons or body of individuals as aforesaid [not being a caseINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
633 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
falling under sub-section (1),—
(i) the  total income  of any  member thereof for th e previous year (excluding his share from such
association or body) exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax in the case ofthat member under the Finance Act of the relevant year, tax shall be charged on the total income of
the association or body at the maximum marginal rate;
(ii) any member or members thereof is or are chargeable to tax at a rate or rates which is or are higher
than the maximum marginal rate, tax shall be charged on that portion or portions of the total
income of the association or body which is or are relatable to the share or shares of such member
or members at such higher rate or rates, as the case may be, and the balance of the total income ofthe association or body shall be taxed at the maximum marginal rate.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the individua l shares of the members of an association of
persons or body of individuals in the whole or any part of the income of such association or body shall be
deemed to be indeterminate or unknown if such shares (in relation to the whole or any part of such income)
are indeterminate or unknown on the date of formation of such association or body or at any time thereafter.
Liability of partners of limited liability partnership in liquidation.

167C.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), where
any tax due from a limited liability partnership in respect of any income of any previous year or from any
other person in respect of any income of any previous year during which such other person was a limited
liability  partnership ca nnot be recovered, in such case, every person who was a partner of the limited
liability partnership at any time during the relevant prev ious year, shall be jointly and severally liable for the
payment of such tax unless he proves that the non-r ecovery cannot be attributed to any gross neglect,
misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the limited liability partnership.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression "tax due" includes penalty, interest or any
other sum payable under the Act.
E.—Executors
Executors.

168. (1) Subject as hereinafter provided, the income of th e estate of a deceased person shall be chargeable to
tax in the hands of the executor,—
(a) if there is only one executor, then, as if the executor were an individual; or
(b) if there are more executors than one, then, as if the executors were an association of persons;
and for the purposes of this Act, the executor shall be deemed to be resident or non-resident according as
the deceased person was a resident or non-resident during the previous year in which his death took place.
(2) The assessment of an executor under this section sh all be made separately from any assessment that may
be made on him in respect of his own income.
(3) Separate assessments shall be made under this sect ion on the total income of each completed previous
year or part  thereof as is included in the  period from the  date  of the  death to the  date  of complete
distribution to the beneficiaries of the estate according to their several interests.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
634 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(4) In computing the total income of any previous year under this section, any income of the estate of that
previous year distributed to, or applied to the benefit of, any specific legatee of the estate during that
previous year shall be excluded; but the income so excluded shall be included in the total income of the
previous year of such specific legatee.
Explanation .—In this section, "executor" includes an administrator or other person administering the estate
of a deceased person.
Right of executor to recover tax paid.

169. The provisions of section 162 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of an executor in respect of tax
paid or payable by him as they apply in the case of a representative assessee.
F.—Succession to business or profession
Succession to business otherwise than on death.

170. (1) Where a person carrying on any business or profession (such person hereinafter in this section being
referred to as the predecessor) has been succeeded therein by any other person (hereinafter in this section
referred to as the successor) who continues to carry on that business or profession,—
(a) the predecessor shall be assessed in respect of the income of the previous year in which the
succession took place up to the date of succession;
(b) the successor shall be assessed in respect of th e income of the previous year after the date of
succession.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when the predecessor cannot be found, the
assessment  of the  income  of the  previous year in which the  succession took place  up to the  date  of
succession and of the previous year preceding that year  shall be made on the successor in like manner and to
the same extent as it would have been made on the predecessor, and all the provisions of this Act shall, so
far as may be, apply accordingly.
(2A)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in  sub-sections  (1)  and  (2),  where  there  is  succession,  the
assessment or reassessment or any other proceedings, made or initiated on the predecessor during the course
of pendency of such succession, shall be deemed to have been made or initiated on the successor and all theprovisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, the term "pendency" means the period commencing
from the date of filing of application for such su ccession of business before the High Court or tri bunal or the
date of admission of an application for corporate insolvency resolution by the Adjudicating Authority asdefined in clause ( 1) of section 5 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) and ending
with the date on which the order of such High Court or tribunal or such Adjudicating Authority, as the case
may be, is received by the Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner.
(3) When any sum payable under this section in respect of  the income of such business or profession for the
previous year in which the succession took place up to the date of succession or for the previous year
preceding that year, assessed on the predecessor, cannot be recovered from him, the Assessing Officer shall
record a finding to that effect and the sum payable by the predecessor shall thereafter be payable by and
recoverable from the successor, and the successor shall be entitled to recover from the predecessor any sumINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
635 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
so paid.
(4)  Where  any  business  or  profession  carried  on  by  a  Hindu  undivided  fa mily  is  succeeded  to,  and
simultaneously with the succession or after the succession there has been a partition of the joint  family
property between the members or groups of members, the tax due in respect of the income of the business or
profession succeeded to, up to the  date of succe ssion, shall be assessed and recovered in the manner
provided in section 171, but without prejudice to the provisions of this section.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, "income" includes any gain accruing from the transfer, in
any manner whatsoever, of the business or profession as a result of the succession.
55[Effect of order of tribunal or court in respect of business reorganisation.

170A.  (1)  Notwithstanding anything to  the  contrary  contained  in  section  139,  in  a  case  of  business
reorganisation, where prior to the date of order of a High Court or tribunal or an Adjudicating Authority as
defined in clause ( 1) of section 5 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) (hereinafter
referred to as order in respect of business reorganisa tion), as the case may be, any return of income has been
furnished by an entity to which such order applie s under the provisions of section 139 for any assessment
year relevant to the previous year to which such order applies, the successor shall furnish, within a period of
six months from the end of the month in which the order was issued, a modified return in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed, in accordance with and limited to the said order.
(2) Where the assessment or reassessment proceedings for an assessment year relevant to a previous year to
which the order in respect of the business reorganisation applies,—
(a) have been completed on the date of furnishing of the modified return in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall pass an order modifying the total incomeof the relevant assessment year determined in such assessment or reassessment, in accordance with
such order and taking into account the modified return so furnished;
(b) are pending on the date of furnishing of the m odified return in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall pass an order assessing or reassessing the total income
of the relevant assessment year in accordance with the order of the business reorganisation and
taking into account the modified return so furnished.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this section, in an assessment or reassessment made in respect of an
assessment year under this section, all other provisions of  this Act shall apply and the tax shall be chargeable
at the rate or rates as applicable to such assessment year.
Explanation. —In this section, the expressions—
(i) "business reorganisation"  means the  reorganisation  of  business involving the  amalgamation  or
demerger or merger of business of one or more persons;
(ii) "successor"  means  all resulting companies  in  a  business  reorganisa-tion,  whether  or  not  the
company was in existence prior to such business reorganisation.]

55. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
636 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
G.—Partition
Assessment after partition of a Hindu undivided family.

171. (1) A Hindu family hitherto assessed as undivided shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to
continue to be a Hindu undivided fa mily, except where and in so far as a finding of partition has been given
under this section in respect of the Hindu undivided fa mily.
(2) Where, at the time of making an assessment under section 143 or section 144, it is claimed by or on
behalf of any member of a Hindu family assessed as undivided that a partition, whether total or partial, has
taken place among the members of such family, the Assessing Officer shall make an i nquiry thereinto after
giving notice of the inquiry to all the members of the fa mily.
(3) On the completion of the inquiry, the Assessing Officer shall record a finding as to whether there has
been a total or partial partition of the joint family prope rty, and, if there has been such a partition, the date
on which it has taken place.
(4) Where a finding of total or partial partition ha s been recorded by the Assessing Officer under this
section, and the partition took place during the previous year,—
(a) the total income of the joint family in respect of the period up to the date of partition shall be
assessed as if no partition had taken place; and
(b) each member or group of members shall, in addition to any tax for which he or it may be separately
liable and notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 2) of section 10, be jointly and severally
liable for the tax on the income so assessed.
(5) Where a finding of total or partial partition ha s been recorded by the Assessing Officer under this
section, and the partition took place after the expiry of the previous year, the total income of the previous
year of the joint family shall be assessed as if no partition had taken place; and the provisions of clause ( b)
of sub-section (4) shall, so far as may be, apply to the case.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the Assessing Officer finds after completion of the
assessment of a Hindu undivided fa mily that the family has already effected a partition, whether total or
partial, the Assessing Officer shall proceed to recove r the tax from every person who was a member of the
family before the partition, and every such person shall be jointly and severally liable for the tax on the
income so assessed.
(7) For the purposes of this section, the several liability of any member or group of members there under
shall be computed according to the portion of the joint family property allotted to him or it at the partition,
whether total or partial.
(8) The provisions of this section shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of any
penalty, interest, fine or other sum in respect of any pe riod up to the date of the partition, whether total or
partial, of a Hindu undivided fa mily as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of tax in respect of
any such period.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, where a partial partition
has taken place after the 31st day of December , 1978, among the members of a Hindu undivided fa mily
hitherto assessed as undivided,—
(a) no claim that such partial partition has taken place shall be inquired into under sub-section (2) and
no finding shall be recorded under sub-section (3) that such partial partition had taken place and
any finding recorded under sub-section (3) to that  effect whether before or after the 18th day of
June, 1980, being the date of introduction of the Finance (No. 2) B ill, 1980, shall be null and void;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
637 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) such family shall continue to be liable to be assessed under this Act as if no such partial partition
had taken place;
(c) each member or group of members of such family immediately before such partial partition and the
family shall be jointly and severally liable for any tax, penalty, interest, fine or other sum payable
under this Act by the fa mily in respect of any peri od, whether before or after such partial partition;
(d) the several liability of any member or group of members aforesaid shall be computed according to
the portion of the joint family property allotted to him or it at such partial partition,
and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
Explanation .—In this section,—
(a) "partition" means—
(i) where the property admits of a physical division, a physical division of the property, but a
physical division of the income without a physical division of the property producing the
income shall not be deemed to be a partition; or
(ii) where  the  property  does not  admit  of  a  physical division,  then  such  division  as the
property admits of, but a mere severance of status shall not be deemed to be a partition;
(b) "partial partition" means a partition which is partial as regards the persons constituting the Hindu
undivided fa mily, or the properties belonging to the Hi ndu undivided fa mily, or both.
H.—Profits of non-residents from occasional shipping business
Shipping business of non-residents.

172. (1) The provisions of this section shall, notwith standing anything contained in the other provisions of
this Act, apply for the purpose of the levy and recove ry of tax in the case of any ship, belonging to or
chartered by a non-resident, which carries passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India.
(2) Where such a ship carries passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, seven and a half
per cent of the amount paid or payable on account of such carriage to the owner or the charterer or to any
person on his behalf, whether that amount is paid or payabl e in or out of India, shall be deemed to be income
accruing in India to the owner or charterer on account of such carriage.
(3) Before the departure from any port in India of any such ship, the master of the ship shall prepare and
furnish to the Assessing Officer a return of the full am ount paid or payable to the owner or charterer or any
person on his behalf, on account of the carriage of all passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at thatport since the last arrival of the ship thereat:
Provided  that where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that  it is not possible for the master of the ship to
furnish the return required by this sub-section before the departure of the ship from the port and provided
the master of the ship has made satisfactory arrangements for the filing of the return and payment of the taxby any other person on his behalf, the Assessing Officer ma y, if the return is filed within thirty days of the
departure of the ship, deem the filing of the return by the person so authorised by the master as sufficient
compliance with this sub-section.
(4) On receipt of the return, the Assessing Officer shall assess the income referred to in sub-section (2) and
determine the sum payable as tax thereon at the rate or  rates in force applicable to the total income of a
company which has not made the arrangements referred to in section 194 and such sum shall be payable by
the master of the ship.
(4A) No order assessing the income and determining the sum of tax payable thereon shall be made under
sub-section (4) after the expiry of nine months from th e end of the financial year in which the return underINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
638 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
sub-section (3) is furnished:
Provided that where the return under sub-section (3) has been furnished before the 1st day of April, 2007,
such order shall be made on or before the 31st day of December, 2008.
(5) For the purpose of determining the tax payable under sub-section (4), the Assessing Officer may call for
such accounts or documents as he may require.
(6) A port clearance shall not be granted to the ship until the Collector of Customs, or other officer duly
authorised to grant the same, is satisfied that the tax assessable under this section has been duly paid or thatsatisfactory arrangements have been made for the payment thereof.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preven t the owner or charterer of a ship from claiming before
the expiry of the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the date of departure of the ship
from the Indian port falls, that an assessment be made of his total income of the previous year and the tax
payable on the basis thereof be determined in accordance with the other provisions of this Act, and if he so
claims, any payment made under this section in respect of the passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at
Indian ports during that previous year shall be treated  as a payment in advance of the tax leviable for that
assessment year, and the difference between the sum so paid and the amount of tax found payable by him on
such assessment shall be paid by him or refunded to him, as the case may be.
(8) For the purposes of this section, the amount referred to in sub-section (2) shall include the amount paid
or payable by way of demurrage charge or handling charge or any other amount of s imilar nature.
I.—Recovery of tax in respect of non-residents
Recovery of tax in respect of non-resident from his assets.

173. Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sectio n (1) of section 161 or of section 167, where the
person entitled to the income referred to in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 9 is a non-resident, the tax
chargeable thereon, whether in his name or in the name of his agent who is liable as a representative
assessee, may be recovered by deduction under any of the provisions of Chapter XVII-B and any arrears of
tax may be recovered also in accordance with the provisions of this Act from any assets of the non-residentwhich are, or may at any time come, within India.
J.—Persons leaving India
Assessment of persons leaving India.

174. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, when it appears to the Assessing Officer that any
individual may leave India during the current assessment year or shortly after its expiry and that he has no
present intention of returning to India, the total income of such individual for the period from the expiry of
the previous year for that assessment year up to th e probable date of his departure from India shall be
chargeable to tax in that assessment year.
(2) The total income of each completed previous year or  part of any previous year included in such period
shall be chargeable to tax at the rate or rates in force in that assessment year, and separate assessments shall
be made in respect of each such completed previous year or part of any previous year.
(3) The Assessing Officer may estimate the income of such individual for such period or any part thereof,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
639 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
where it cannot be readily determined in the manner provided in this Act.
(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer may serve a notice
upon such individual requiring him to furnish within such time, not being less than seven days, as may be
specified in the notice, a return in the same form and verified in the same manner as a return under clause ( i)
of sub-section (1) of section 142, setting forth his total income for each completed previous year comprisedin the period referred to in sub-section (1) and his estimated total income for any part of the previous year
comprised in that period; and the provisions of this Ac t shall, so far as may be, and subject to the provisions
of this section, apply as if the notice were a notice issued under clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 142.
(5) The tax chargeable under this section shall be in addition to the tax, if any, chargeable under any other
provision of this Act.
(6) Where the provisions of sub-section (1) are applicable, any notice issued by the Assessing Officer under
clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 142 or section 148 in respect of any tax chargeable under any other
provision of this Act may, notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 142
or section 148, as the case may be, require the furnishing of the return by such individual within such period,
not being less than seven days, as the Assessing Officer may think proper.
JA.—Association of persons or body of individuals or artificial juridical person formed for a particular
event or purpose
Assessment of association of persons or body of individuals or artificial juridical person formed for a
particular event or purpose.

174A.  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any
association of persons or a body of individuals or an artificial juridical person, formed or established orincorporated for a particular event or purpose is likely to be dissolved in the assessment year in which such
association of persons or a body of individuals or an artificial juridical person was formed or established or
incorporated or immediately after such assessment year, the total income of such association or body or
juridical person for the period from the expiry of the previous year for that assessment year up to the date of
its dissolution shall be chargeable to tax in that asse ssment year, and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6)
of section 174 shall, so far as may be, apply to any proceedings in the case of any such person as they applyin the case of persons leaving India.
K.—Persons trying to alienate their assets
Assessment of persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax.

175. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, if it appears to the Assessing Officer during any
current assessment year that any person is likely to ch arge, sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with
any of his assets with a view to avoiding payment of any liability under the provisions of this Act, the total
income of such person for the period from the expiry of the previous year for that assessment year to thedate when the Assessing Officer commences proceedings under this section shall be chargeable to tax in that
assessment year, and the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) of section 174 shall, so far as
may be, apply to any proceedings in the case of any such person as they apply in the case of persons leavingIndia.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
640 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
L.—Discontinuance of business, or dissolution
Discontinued business.

176. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, where any business or profession is discontinued
in any assessment year, the income of the period from the expiry of the previous year for that assessment
year up to the date of such discontinuance may, at the discretion of the Assessing Officer, be charged to tax
in that assessment year.
(2) The total income of each completed previous year or  part of any previous year included in such period
shall be chargeable to tax at the rate or rates in force in that assessment year, and separate assessments shallbe made in respect of each such completed previous year or part of any previous year.
(3) Any person discontinuing any business or profession  shall give to the Assessing Officer notice of such
discontinuance within fifteen days thereof.
(3A) Where any business is discontinued in any year , any sum received after the discontinuance shall be
deemed to be the income of the recipient and charged to  tax accordingly in the year of receipt, if such sum
would have been included in the total income of the person who carried on the business had such sum been
received before such discontinuance.
(4) Where any profession is discontinued in any year on account of the cessation of the profession by, or the
retirement or death of, the person carrying on th e profession, any sum received after the discontinuance
shall be deemed to be the income of the recipient and charged to tax accordingly in the year of receipt, if
such sum would have been included in the total income  of the aforesaid person had it been received before
such discontinuance.
(5) Where an assessment is to be made under the provisi ons of this section, the Assessing Officer may serve
on the person whose income is to be assessed or, in the case of a firm, on any person who was a partner of
such firm at the time of its discontinuance or, in the case of a company, on the principal officer thereof, a
notice containing all or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under clause ( i) of
sub-section (1) of section 142 and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly as if
the notice were a notice issued under clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 142.
(6) The tax chargeable under this section shall be in addition to the tax, if any, chargeable under any other
provision of this Act.
(7) Where the provisions of sub-section (1) are applicable, any notice issued by the Assessing Officer under
clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 142 or section 148 in respect of any tax chargeable under any other
provisions of this Act may, notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( i) of sub-section (1) of section 142
or section 148, as the case may be, require the furnishing  of the return by the person to whom the aforesaid
notices are issued within such period, not being less than seven days, as the Assessing Officer may think
proper.
Association dissolved or business discontinued.

177. (1) Where any business or profession carried on by an association of persons has been discontinued or
where an association of persons is dissolved, the Asse ssing Officer shall make an assessment of the total
income of the association of persons as if no such di scontinuance or dissolution had taken place, and all theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
641 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
provisions of this Act, including the provisions relating  to the levy of a penalty or any other sum chargeable
under any provision of this Act shall apply, so far as may be, to such assessment.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing sub-section, if the Assessing Officer or 56[the Joint
Commissioner (Appeals)] or the Commissioner (Appeals) in  the course of any proceeding under this Act in
respect of any such association of persons as is referred to in that sub-section is satisfied that the association
of persons was guilty of any of the acts specified in Chapter XXI, he may impose or direct the imposition ofa penalty in accordance with the provisions of that Chapter.
(3) Every person who was at the time of such discontinuance or dissolution a member of the association of
persons, and the legal representative of any such person  who is deceased, shall be jointly and severally liable
for the amount of tax, penalty or other sum payable, and a ll the provisions of this Act, so far as may be, shall
apply to any such assessment or imposition of penalty or other sum.
(4) Where such discontinuance or dissolution takes place after any proceedings in respect of an assessment
year have commenced, the proceedings may be continued against the persons referred to in sub-section (3)
from the stage at which the proceedings stood at the t ime of such discontinuance or dissolution, and all the
provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of sub-section (6) of section 159.

56. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Company in liquidation.

178. (1) Every person—
(a) who is the liquidator of any company which is be ing wound up, whether under the orders of a court
or otherwise; or
(b) who has been appointed the receiver of any assets of a company,
(hereinafter referred to as the liquidator) shall, within thirty days after he has become such liquidator, give
notice of his appointment as such to the Assessing Officer who is entitled to assess the income of thecompany.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, after making such inquiries or ca lling for such information as he may deem
fit, notify to the liquidator within three months from the date on which he receives notice of the appointment
of the liquidator the amount which, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, would be sufficient to provide
for any tax which is then, or is likely thereafter to become, payable by the company.
(3) The liquidator—
(a) shall not,  without  the  leave  of  the  Principal Chief  Co mmissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner  or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, part  with any of the  assets of the  company or the
properties in his hands until he has been notified by the Assessing Officer under sub-section (2) ;
and
(b) on being so notified, shall set aside an amount, equal to the amount notified and, until he so sets
aside such amount, shall not part with any of the assets of the company or the properties in his
hands :INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
642 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub-section shall debar the liquidator from parting with such assets
or properties for the purpose of the payment of the tax payable by the company or for making any payment
to secured creditors whose debts are entitled under law to priority of payment over debts due to Government
on the date of liquidation or for meeting such costs an d expenses of the winding up of the company as are in
the opinion of the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner reasonable.
(4) If the liquidator fails to give the notice in accordan ce with sub-section (1) or fails to set aside the amount
as required by sub-section (3) or parts with any of the assets of the company or the properties in his hands incontravention of the provisions of that sub-section, he  shall be personally liable for the payment of the tax
which the company would be liable to pay :
Provided  that if the amount of any tax payable by the company is notified under sub-section (2), the
personal liability of the liquidator under this sub-section shall be to the extent of such amount.
(5) Where there are more liquidators than one, the obligations and liabilities attached to the liquidator under
this section shall attach to all the liquidators jointly and severally.
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
other law for the time being in force except the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31
of 2016).
M.—Private companies
Liability of directors of private company.

179. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), where any tax due
from a private company in respect of any income of a ny previous year or from any other company in respect
of any income of any previous year during which such other company was a private company cannot be
recovered, then, every person who was a director of the private company at any time during the relevant
previous year shall be jointly and severally liable fo r the payment of such tax unless he proves that the
non-recovery cannot be attributed to any gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation
to the affairs of the company.
(2) Where a private company is converted into a public company and the tax assessed in respect of any
income of any previous year during which such comp any was a private company cannot be recovered, then,
nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to an y person who was a director of such private company
in relation to any tax due in respect of any income  of such private company assessable for any assessment
year commencing before the 1st day of April, 1962.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression "tax due" includes penalty, interest, fees or
any other sum payable under the Act.
N.—Special provisions for certain kinds of income
Royalties or copyright fees for literary or artistic work.

180. Where the time taken by the author of a literary or artistic work in the making thereof is more than
twelve months, the amount received or receivable by him during any previous year on account of any lump
sum consideration for the assignment or grant of any of  his interests in the copyright of that work or ofINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
643 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
royalties or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or otherwise), in respect of that work, shall, if he
so claims, be allocated for purposes of assessment in such manner and to such period as may be prescribed :
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply in  relation to the previous year relevant to the
assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2000.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expre ssion "author" includes a joint author, and the
expression "lump sum", in regard to royalties or copyright fees, includes an advance payment on account ofsuch royalties or copyright fees which is not returnable.
Consideration for know-how.

180A.  Where the time taken by an individual, who is resident in India, for developing any know-how is more
than twelve  months, he  may elect  that  the  gross amount  of any lump sum consideration received or
receivable by him during the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of
April, 2000 or earlier assessment years for allowing use of such know-how shall be treated for the purposes
of charging income-tax for that year and for each of the two immediately preceding previous years as if
one-third thereof were included in his income chargeable to tax for each of those years respectively and if
he so elects, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act,—
(a) such gross amount shall be so treated, and
(b) the  assessments for  each of  the  two preceding previous years shall, if  made, be  accordingly
rectified under section 154, the period of four years specified in sub-section (7) of that section
being reckoned from the end of the financial year in which the assessment relating to the previous
year in which the amount was received or receivable by such individual is made.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expressi on "know-how" has the meaning assigned to it in
section 35AB.
O.—[***]

181. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1988, w .e.f. 1-4-1989. ]
Chapter XVI
Special provisions applicable to firms
A.—Assessment of firms
Assessment of registered firms.

182. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1992, w .e.f. 1-4-1993. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
644 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Assessment of unre gistered firms .

183. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1992, w .e.f. 1-4-1993. ]
Assessment as a firm.

184. (1) A firm shall be assessed as a firm for the purposes of this Act, if—
(i) the partnership is evidenced by an instrument; and
(ii) the individual shares of the partners are specified in that instrument.
(2) A certified copy of the instrument of partnership referred to in sub-section (1) shall accompany the
return of income of the firm of the previous year re levant to the assessment year commencing on or after the
1st day of April, 1993 in respect of which assessment as a firm is first sought.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, the copy of the instrument of partnership shall be
certified in writing by all the partners (not being minors) or, where the return is made after the dissolution ofthe firm, by all persons (not being minors) who were partners in the firm immediately before its dissolution
and by the legal representative of any such partner who is deceased.
(3) Where a firm is assessed as such for any assessment year, it shall be assessed in the same capacity for
every subsequent year if there is no change in the cons titution of the firm or the shares of the partners as
evidenced by the instrument of partnership on the basis of which the assessment as a firm was first sought.
(4) Where any such change had taken place in the prev ious year, the firm shall furnish a certified copy of
the revised instrument of partnership along with the return of income for the assessment year relevant to
such previous year and all the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.
(5)  Notwithstanding anything contained  in  any  other  provision  of  this Act,  where,  in  respect  of  any
assessment year, there is on the part of a firm any such failure as is mentioned in section 144, the firm shall
be  so  assessed  that  no  deduction  by  way  of  any  payment  of  interest,  salary,  bonus,  co mmission  or
remuneration, by whatever name called, made by such firm to any partner of such firm shall be allowed incomputing the income chargeable under the head "Pro fits and gains of business or profession" and such
interest, salary, bonus, co mmission or remuneration shall not be chargeable to income-tax under clause ( v) of
section 28.
Assessment when section 184 not complied with.