3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 116 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).  
85 
 (11) The Appellate Authority shall, after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such 
order, as it thinks just and proper, confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed 
against but shall not refer the case back to the adjudicating authority that passed the said decision or 
order:  
Provided that an order enhancing any fee or penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or confiscating 
goods of greater value or reducing the amount of refund or input tax credit shall not be passed unless the 
appellant has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed order:  
Provided further that where the Appellate Authority is of the opinion that any tax has not been paid or 
short -paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised, no 
order requiring the appellant to pay such tax or input tax credit shall be passed unless the appellant is 
given notice to show cause against the proposed order and the order is passed within the time limit 
specified under section 73 or section 74  1[or section 74A] . 
(12) The order of the Appellate Authority disposing of the appeal shall be in writing and shall state 
the points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision . 
(13) The Appellate Authority shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide every appeal within 
a period of one year from the date on which it is filed:  
Provided that where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of a court or Tribunal, the period of 
such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of one year . 
(14) On disposal of the appeal, the Appellate Authority shall communicate the order passed by it to 
the appellant, respondent and to the adjudicating authority.  
(15) A copy of the order passed by the Appellate Authority shall also be sent to the jurisdictional 
Commissioner or the authority designated by him in this behalf and the jurisdictional Commissioner of 
State tax or Commissioner of Union Territory Tax or an authority designated by him in this behalf.  
(16) Every order passed under this section shall, subject to the provisions of section 108 or                  
section 113 or section 117 or section 118 be final and binding on the parties.

108. Powers of Revisional Authority. —(1) Subject to the provisions of section 121 and any rules 
made thereunder, the Revisional Authority may, on his own motion, or upon information received by him 
or on request from the Commissioner of State tax, or the Commissioner of Union territory tax, call for 
and examine the record of any proceedings, and if he considers that any decision or order passed under 
this Act or under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax 
Act by any officer subordinate to him is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interest of revenue 
and is illegal or improper or has not taken into account certain material facts, whether available at the 
time of issuance of the said order or not or in consequence of an observation by the Comptroller and 
Auditor  General of India, he may, if necessary, stay the operation of such decision or order for such 
period as he deems fit and after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard and after 
making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order, as he thinks just and proper, including 
enhancing or modifying or annulling the said decision or order.  
(2) The Revisional Authority shall not exercise any power under sub -section ( 1), if— 
(a) the order has been subject to an appeal under section 107 or section 112 or section 117 or 
section 118; or  
(b) the period specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 107 has not yet expired or more than 
three years have expired after the passing of the decision or order sought to be revised; or  
(c) the order has already been taken for revision under this section at an earlier stage; or  
(d) the order has been passed in exercise of the powers under sub -section ( 1):

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 41 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
86 
 Provided that the Revisional Authority may pass an order under sub -section ( 1) on any point which 
has not been raised and decided in an appeal referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), before the expiry 
of a period of one year from the date of the order in such appeal or before the expiry of a period of three 
years referred to in clause ( b) of that sub -section, whichever is later.  
(3) Every order passed in revision under sub -section ( 1) shall, subject to the provisions of section 113 or 
section 117 or section 118, be final and binding on the parties.  
(4) If the said decision or order involves an issue on which the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has 
given its decision in some other proceedings and an appeal to the High Court or the Supreme Court against 
such decision of the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court is pending, the period spent between the date of the 
decision of the Appellate Tribunal and the date of the decision of the High Court or the date of the decision of  
the High Court and the date of decision of the Supreme Court shall be excluded in computing the period of 
limitation referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) where proceedings for revision have been initiated by way 
of issue of a notice under this section.  
(5) Where the issuance of an order under sub -section ( 1) is stayed by the order of a court or Appellate 
Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of limitation referred to in 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2). 
(6) For the purposes of this section, the term, –– 
(i) “record” shall include all records relating to any proceedings under this Act available at the 
time of examination by the Revisional Authority;  
(ii) “decision” shall include intimation given by any officer lower in rank than the Revisional 
Authority.  
1[109. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal and Benches thereof. — (1) The Government shall, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by notification, establish with effect from such date as may be specified 
therein, an Appellate Tribunal known as the Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal for hearing 
appeals against the orders passed by the Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority  2[, or for 
conducting an examination or adjudicating the cases referred to in sub -section ( 2) of sections 171, if so 
notified under the said section ]. 
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Appellate Tribunal shall be exercised by 
the Principal Bench and the State Benches constituted under sub -section ( 3) and sub -section ( 4).  
(3) The Government shall, by notification, constitute a Principal Bench of the Appellate Tribunal at 
New Delhi which shall consist of the President, a Judicial Member, a Technical Member (Centre) and a 
Technical Member (State).  
(4) On the request of the State, the Government may, by notification, constitute such number of State 
Benches at such places and with such jurisdiction as may be recommended by the Council, which shall 
consist of two Judical Members, a Technial Member (Centre) and a Technical Member (State).  
(5) The Principal Bench and the State Bench shall hear appeals against the orders passed by the 
Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority:  
Provided that the cases in which any one of the issues involved relates to the place of supply, shall be 
heard only by the Principal Bench.  
2[Provided further that the matters referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 171 shall be examined or 
adjudicated only by the Principal Bench:  
Provided also that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify other cases or 
class of cases which shall be heard only by the Principal Bench.]

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 149, for section 109 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2023).

2. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 42 (w.e.f. 27-9-2024).  
87 
 (6) 1[Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the President] shall, from time to time, by a general 
or special order, distribute the business of the Appellate Tribunal among the Benches and may transfer 
cases from one Bench to another.  
(7) The senior -most Judicial Member within the State Benches, as may be notified, shall act as the 
Vice -President for such State Benches and shall exercise such powers of the President as may be 
prescribed, but for all other purposes be considered as a Member.  
(8) Appeals, where the tax or input tax credit involved or the amount of fine, fee or penalty 
determined in any order appealed against, does not exceed fifty lakh rupees and which does not involve 
any question of law may, with the approval of the President, and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed on the recommendations of the Council, be heard by a single Member, and in all other cases, 
shall be heard together by one Judicial Member and one Technical Member.  
(9) If, after hearing the case, the Members differ in their opinion on any point or points, such Member 
shall state the point or points on which they differ, and the President shall refer such case for hearing, — 
(a) where the appeal was originally heard by Members of a State Bench, to another Member of a 
State Bench within the State or, where no such other State Bench is available within the State, to a 
Member of a State Bench in another State;  
(b) where the appeal was originally heard by Members of the Principal Bench, to another Member 
from the Principal Bench or, where no such other Member is available, to a Member of any State 
Bench,  
and such point or points shall be decided according to the majority opinion including the opinion of the 
Members who first heard the case.  
(10) The Government may, in consultation with the President, for the administrative efficiency, 
transfer Members from one Bench to another Bench:  
Provided that a Technical Member (State) of a State Bench may be transferred to a State Bench only 
of the same State in which he was originally appointed, in consultation with the State Government.  
(11) No act or proceedings of the Appellate Tribunal shall be questioned or shall be invalid merely on 
the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Appellate Tribunal. ] 
2[110.  President and Members of Appellate Tribunal, their qualification, appointment, conditions of 
service, etc .— (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as — 
(a) the President, unless he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or is  or has been the Chief 
Justice of a High Court;  
(b) a Judicial Member, unless he — 
(i) has been a Judge of the High Court; or  
(ii) has, for a combined period of ten years, been a District Judge or  an Additional District 
Judge;  
3[(iii) has been an advocate for ten years with substantial experience in litigation in matters 
relating to indirect taxes in the Appellate Tribunal, Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate 
Tribunal, State Value Added Tax Tribunal, by whatever name called, High Court or Supreme 
Court; ]

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 202 4, s. 142, for “The President” (w.e.f. 27-9-2024).

2. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 150, for section 110 (w.e.f. 1-8-2023).

3. Ins. by Act 48 of 2023, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -12-2023).  
88 
 1[Provided that a person who has not completed the age of fifty years shall not be eligible for 
appointment as the President or Member.]  
(c) a Technical Member (Centre), unless he is or has been a member of  the Indian Revenue 
(Customs and Indirect Taxes) Service, Group A, or of the All  India Service with at least three years of 
experience in the administration of an  existing law or goods and services tax in the Central 
Government, and has  completed at least twenty -five years of service in Group A;  
(d) a Technical Member (State), unless he is or has been an officer of the  State Government or an 
officer of All India Service, not below the rank of  Additional Commissioner of Value Added Tax or 
the State goods and services  tax or such rank, not lower than that of the First Appellate Authority, as 
may be  notified by the concerned State Government, on the recommendations of the  Council and has 
completed twenty -five years of service in Group A, or  equivalent, with at least three years of 
experience in the administration of an  existing law or the goods and services tax or in the field of 
finance and taxation  in the State Government:  
Provided that the State Government may, on the recommendations of the  Council, by notification, 
relax the requirement of completion of twenty -five years of service in Group A, or equivalent, in 
respect of officers of such State  where no person has completed twenty -five years of service in Group 
A, or  equivalent, but has completed twenty -five years of service in the Government,  subject to such 
conditions, and till such period, as may be specified in the  notification.  
(2) The President, Judicial Member, Technical Member (Centre) and Technical  Member (State) shall 
be appointed or re -appointed by the Government on the  recommendations of a Search -cum-Selection 
Committee constituted under  sub-section ( 4): 
Provided that in the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the  President by reason of 
his death, resignation or otherwise, the Judicial Member or, in  his absence, the senior -most Technical 
Member of the Principa l Bench shall act as the  President until the date on which a new President, 
appointed in accordance with the  provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office:  
Provided further that where the President is unable to discharge his functions  owing to absence, 
illness or any other cause, the Judicial Member or, in his absence,  the senior -most Technical Member of 
the Principal Bench, shall discharge the  functions of the President until the date on which the President 
resumes his duties.  
(3) While making selection for Technical Member (State) of a State Bench, first  preference shall be 
given to officers who have worked in the State Government of the  State to which the jurisdiction of the 
Bench extends.  
(4) (a) The Search -cum-Selection Committee for Technical Member (State) of a  State Bench shall 
consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Chief Justice of the High Court in whose jurisdiction the State  Bench is located, to be the 
Chairperson of the Committee;  
(ii) the senior -most Judicia l Member in the State, and where no Judicia l Member is available, a 
retired Judge of the High Court in whose jurisdiction the  State Bench is located, as may be nominated 
by the Chief Justice of such  High Court;  
(iii) Chief Secretary of the State in which the State Bench is located;

1. Ins. by Act 48 of 2023, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -12-2023).  
89 
 (iv) one Additional Chief Secretary or Principal Secretary or Secretary of  the State in which the 
State Bench is located, as may be nominated by such  State Government, not in -charge of the 
Department responsible for  administration of State tax; and   
(v) Additional Chief Secretary or Principal Secretary or Secretary of the  Department responsible 
for administration of State tax, of the State in which the  State Bench is located — Member Secretary; 
and 
(b) the Search -cum-Selection Committee for all other cases shall consist of the  following members, 
namely: — 
(i) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of Supreme Court nominated by  him, to be the 
Chairperson of the Committee;  
(ii) Secretary of the Central Government nominated by the Cabinet  Secretary — Member;  
(iii) Chief Secretary of a State to be nominated by the Council —Member;  
(iv) one Member, who — 
(A) in case of appointment of a President of a Tribunal, shall be the  outgoing President of the 
Tribunal; or  
(B) in case of appointment of a Member of a Tribunal, shall be the  sitting President of the 
Tribunal; or  
(C) in case of the President of the Tribunal seeking re -appointment  or where the outgoing 
President is unavailable or the removal of the  President is being considered, shall be a retired 
Judge of the  Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court nominated by the  Chief 
Justice of India; and  
(v) Secretary of the Department of Revenue in the Ministry of Finance of  the Central    
Government —Member Secretary.  
(5) The Chairperson shall have the casting vote and the Member Secretary  shall not have a vote.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order, or decree of  any court or any law for 
the time being in force, the Committee shall recommend a  panel of two names for appointment or                   
re-appointment to the post of the President or  a Member, as the case may be.  
(7) No appointment or re -appointment of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal  shall be invalid 
merely by reason of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the  Search -cum-Selection Committee.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order, or decree of  any court or any law for 
the time being in force, the salary of the President and the  Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be 
such as may be prescribed and their  allowances and other terms and conditions of service shall be the 
same as applicable  to Central Government officers carrying the same pay:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor other terms and conditions  of service of the 
President of Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be varied to  their disadvantage after their 
appointment:  
Provided further that, if the President or Member takes a house on rent, he may  be reimbursed a house 
rent higher than the house rent allowance as are admissible to  a Central Government officer holding the 
post carrying the same pay, subject to such  limitations and conditions as may be prescribed.  
90 
 (9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order, or decree of  any court or any law for 
the time being in force, the President of the Appellate Tribunal  shall hold office for a term of four years 
from the date on which he enters upon his  office, or until he attains the age of  1[seventy years, whichever 
is earlier and shall be eligible for re-appointment for a period not exceeding two years subject to the age -
limit specified above] . 
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order, or decree of  any court or any law 
for the time being in force, the Judicial Member, Technical  Member (Centre) or Technical Member 
(State) of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold  office for a term of four years from the date on which he 
enters upon his office, or until  he attains the age of 1[sixty -seven years, whichever is earlier and shall be 
eligible for re -appointment for a period not exceeding two years subject to the age -limit specified above] . 
(11) The President or any Member may, by notice in writing under his hand  addressed to the 
Government, resign from his office:  
Provided that the President or Member shall continue to hold office until the  expiry of three months 
from the date of receipt of such notice by the Government or  until a person duly appointed as his 
successor enters upon his office or until the  expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
(12) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Search -cum-Selection  Committee, remove 
from the office President or a Member, who —  
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such  President or Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect  prejudicially his functions as 
such President or Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office  prejudicial to the public 
interest:  
Provided that the President or the Member shall not be removed on any of the  grounds specified 
in clauses ( d) and ( e), unless he has been informed of the charges  against him and has been given an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(13) The Government, on the recommendations of the Search -cum-Selection  Committee, may 
suspend from office, the President or a Judicial or Technical  Member in respect of whom proceedings for 
removal have been initiated under  sub-section ( 12). 
(14) Subject to the provisions of article 220 of the Constitution, the President or  other Members, on 
ceasing to hold their office, shall not be eligible to appear, act or  plead before the Principal Bench or the 
State Bench in which he was the President or,  as the case may be, a Member. ]

111. Procedure before Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not, while disposing of 
any proceedings before it or an appeal before it, be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate its 
own procedure.

1. Subs. by Act 48 of 2023, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -12-2023).  
91 
 (2) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872                    
(1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it 
ex parte ; and  
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Any order made by the Appellate Tribunal may be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were 
a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein, and it shall be lawful for the Appellate Tribunal to 
send for execution of its orders to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, — 
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the company is situated; or  
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the person concerned voluntarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gain.  
(4) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).

112. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed against him 
under section 107 or section 108 of this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order within 
three months from the date on which the order sought to be appealed against is communicated to the 
person preferring the appeal  1[; or the date, as may be notified by the Government, on the 
recommendations of the Council, for filing appeal before the Appellate Tribunal under this Act, 
whichever is later.]  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, in its discretion, refuse to admit any such appeal where the tax or 
input tax credit involved or the difference in tax or input tax credit involved or the amount of fine, fee or 
penalty determined by such order, does not exceed fifty thousand rupees.  
(3) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon request from the Commissioner of State tax or 
Commissioner of Union territory tax, call for and examine the record of any order passed by the Appellate 
Authority or the Revisional Authority under this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of the 
said order and may, by order, direct any officer subordinate to him to apply to the Appellate Tribunal within 
six months from the date on which the said order has been passed  1[; or the date, as may be notified by the 
Government, on the recommendations of the Council, for the purpose of filing application before the 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act, whichever is later,]  for determination of such points arising out of the 
said order as may be specified by the Commissioner in his order.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 43 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2024).  
92 
 (4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub -section ( 3) the authorised officer makes an application to 
the Appellate Tribunal, such application shall be dealt with by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an appeal 
made against the order under sub -section ( 11) of section 107 or under sub -section ( 1) of section 108 and the 
provisions of this Act shall apply to such application, as they apply in relation to appeals filed under            
sub-section ( 1). 
(5) On receipt of notice that an appeal has been preferred under this section, the party against whom 
the appeal has been preferred may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed against such order or 
any part thereof, file, within forty -five days of the receipt of notice, a memorandum of cross -objections, 
verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the order appealed against and such memorandum 
shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal, as if it were an appeal presented within the time specified 
in sub -section ( 1). 
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal within three months after the expiry of the period 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) 1[or permit the filing of an application within three mo nths after the expiry 
of the period referred to in sub -section ( 3)], or permit the filing of a memorandum of cross -objections 
within forty -five days after the expiry of the period referred to in sub -section ( 5) if it is satisfied that 
there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period.  
(7) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in such form, verified in such manner and shall be 
accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed.  
(8) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section ( 1), unless the appellant has paid –– 
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the 
impugned order, as is admitted by him; and  
(b) a sum equal to 2[ten per cent. ] of the remaining amount of tax in dispute, in addition to the 
amount paid under sub -section ( 6) of section 107, arising from the said order,  3[subject to a maximum 
of 4[twenty crore rupees], ] in relation to which the appeal has been filed.  
(9) Where the appellant has paid the amount as per sub -section ( 8), the recovery proceedings for the 
balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed till the disposal of the appeal.  
(10) Every application made before the Appellate Tribunal, — 
(a) in an appeal for rectification of error or for any other purpose; or  
(b) for restoration of an appeal or an application,  
shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.

113. Orders of Appellate Tribunal. —(1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or 
annulling the decision or order appealed against or may refer the case back to the Appellate Authority, or 
the Revisional Authority or to the original adjudicating authority, with such directions as it may think fit, 
for a fresh adjudication or decision after taking additional evidence, if necessary.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage of hearing of an appeal, 
grant time to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for reasons to be recorded in 
writing:

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024 , s. 143 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Subs. by s. 1 43, ibid., for “twenty per cent.” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

3. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 43, for “ fifty crore rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
93 
 Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing 
of the appeal.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may amend any order passed by it under sub -section ( 1) so as to rectify 
any error apparent on the face of the record, if such error is noticed by it on its own accord, or is brought 
to its notice by the Commissioner or the Commissioner of State tax or the Commissioner of the Union 
territory tax or the other party to the appeal within a period of three months from the date of the order:  
Provided that no amendment which has the effect of enhancing an assessment or reducing a refund or 
input tax credit or otherwise increasing the liability of the other party, shall be made under this                     
sub-section, unless the party has been given an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall, as far as possible, hear and decide every appeal within a period of 
one year from the date on which it is filed.  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to the Appellate 
Authority or the Revisional Authority, or the original adjudicating authority, as the case may be, the appellant 
and the jurisdictional Commissioner or the Commissioner of State tax or the Union territory tax.  
(6) Save as provided in section 117 or section 118, orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal on an 
appeal shall be final and binding on the parties.  
1[114. Financial and administrative powers of President .— The President shall exercise such 
financial and administrative powers over the Appellate Tribunal as may be prescribed.]

115. Interest on refund of amount paid for admission of appeal .—Where an amount paid by the 
appellant under sub -section ( 6) of section 107 or sub -section ( 8) of section 112 is required to be refunded 
consequent to any order of the Appellate Authority or of the Appellate Tribunal, interest at the rate 
specified under section 56 shall be payable in respect of such refund from the date of payment of the 
amount till the date of refund of such amount.

116. Appearance by authorised representative .—(1) Any person who is entitled or required to 
appear before an officer appointed under this Act, or the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal in 
connection with any proceedings under this Act, may, otherwise than when required under this Act to 
appear personally for examination on oath or affirmation, subject to the other provisions of this section, 
appear by an authorised representative.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the expression “authorised representative” shall mean a person 
authorised by the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) to appear on his behalf, being — 
(a) his relative or regular employee; or  
(b) an advocate who is entitled to practice in any court in India, and who has not been debarred 
from practicing before any court in India; or  
(c) any chartered accountant, a cost accountant or a company secretary, who holds a certificate of 
practice and who has not been debarred from practice; or  
(d) a retired officer of the Commercial Tax Department of any State Government or Union territory or 
of the Board who, during his service under the Government, had worked in a post not below the rank than 
that of a Group -B Gazetted officer for a period of not less than two years:  
Provided that such officer shall not be entitled to appear before any proceedings under this Act for a 
period of one year from the date of his retirement or resignation; or  
(e) any person who has been authorised to act as a goods and services tax practitioner on behalf of 
the concerned registered person.  
(3) No person, —

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 151, for section 114 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2023).   
94 
 (a)  who has been dismissed or removed from Government service; or  
(b) who is convicted of an offence connected with any proceedings under this Act, the State 
Goods and Services Tax Act, the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory 
Goods and Services Tax Act, or under the existing law or under any of the Acts passed by a State 
Legislature dealing with the imposition of taxes on sale of goods or supply of goods or services or 
both; or  
(c) who is found guilty of misconduct by the prescribed authority; or  
(d) who has been adjudged as an insolvent,  
shall be qualified to represent any person under sub -section ( 1)— 
(i) for all times in case of persons referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c); and  
(ii) for the period during which the insolvency continues in the case of a person referred to in 
clause ( d). 
(4) Any person who has been disqualified under the provisions of the State Goods and Services Tax 
Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be disqualified under this Act.

117. Appeal to High Court. —(1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the 1[State Bench es] of 
the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court and the High Court may admit such appeal, if it 
is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of one hundred and eighty days from 
the date on which the order appealed against is received by the aggrieved person and it shall be in such 
form, verified in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within such period.  
(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate that question and the appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the 
respondents shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such 
question:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the court 
to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, 
if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.  
(4) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and deliver such judgment thereon 
containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and may award such cost as it deems fit.  
(5) The High Court may determine any issue which –– 
(a) has not been determined by the 1[State Bench es]; or  
(b) has been wrongly determined by the 1[State Bench es], by reason of a decision on such question 
of law as herein referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(6) Where an appeal has been filed before the High Court, it shall be heard by a Bench of not less 
than two Judges of the High Court, and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or 
of the majority, if any, of such Judges.  
(7) Where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state the point of law upon which they differ and the 
case shall, then, be heard upon that point only, by one or more of the other Judges of the High Court and such 
point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Judges who have heard the case 
including those who first heard it.

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 152, for “ State Bench or Area Bench” (w.e.f. 1 -8-2023).  
95 
 (8) Where the High Court delivers a judgment in an appeal filed before it under this section, effect 
shall be given to such judgment by either side on the basis of a certified copy of the judgment.  
(9) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908           
(5 of 1908), relating to appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals 
under this section.

118. Appeal to Supreme Court. ––(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court — 
(a) from any order passed by the 1[Principal Bench ] of the Appellate Tribunal; or  
(b) from any judgment or order passed by the High Court in an appeal made under section 117 
in any case which, on its own motion or on an application made by or on behalf of the party 
aggrieved, immediately after passing of the judgment or order, the High Court certifies to be a fit 
one for appeal to the Supreme Court.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), relating to appeals to the 
Supreme Court shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under this section as they apply in the 
case of appeals from decrees of a High Court.  
(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed in the appeal, effect shall be given to 
the order of the Supreme Court in the manner provided in section 117 in the case of a judgment of the 
High Court.

119. Sums due to be paid notwithstanding appeal, etc. ––Notwithstanding that an appeal has been 
preferred to the High Court or the Supreme Court, sums due to the Government as a result of an order 
passed by the 2[Principal Bench] of the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section 113 or an 
order passed by the 3[State Benches ] of the Appellate Tribunal under  sub-section ( 1) of section 113 or an 
order passed by the High Court under section 117, as the case may be, shall be payable in accordance 
with the order so passed.

120. Appeal not to be filed in certain cases .––(1) The Board may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, from time to time, issue orders or instructions or directions fixing such monetary limits, as it 
may deem fit, for the purposes of regulating the filing of appeal or application by the officer of the central 
tax under the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Where, in pursuance of the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1), the 
officer of the central tax has not filed an appeal or application against any decision or order passed under 
the provisions of this Act, it shall not preclude such officer of the central tax from filing appeal or 
application in any other case involving the same or similar issues or questions of law.  
(3) Notwithstanding the fact that no appeal or application has been filed by the officer of the central 
tax pursuant to the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1), no person, being a 
party in appeal or application shall contend that the officer of the central tax has acquiesced in the 
decision on the disputed issue by not filing an appeal or application.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal or court hearing such appeal or application shall have regard to the 
circumstances under which appeal or application was not filed by the officer of the central tax in 
pursuance of the orders or instructions or directions issued under sub -section ( 1).

121. Non-appealable decisions and orders .––Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any 
provisions of this Act, no appeal shall lie against any decision taken or order passed by an officer of central tax 
if such decision taken or order passed relates to any one or more of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) an order of the Commissioner or other authority empowered to direct transfer of proceedings 
from one officer to another officer; or  
(b) an order pertaining to the seizure or retention of books of account, register and other 
documents; or

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023 , s. 153, for “ National Bench or Regional Bench ” (w.e.f. 1 -8-2023).

2. Subs. by s. 154, ibid., for “ National Bench or Regional Benches” (w.e.f. 1 -8-2023).

3. Subs. by s. 154, ibid., for “ State Bench or Area Benches” (w.e.f. 1 -8-2023).  
96 
 (c) an order sanctioning prosecution under this Act; or  
(d) an order passed under section 80.  
CHAPTER XIX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

122. Penalty for certain offences .––(1) Where a taxable person who –– 
(i) supplies any goods or services or both without issue of any invoice or issues an incorrect or 
false invoice with regard to any such supply;  
(ii) issues any invoice or bill without supply of goods or services or both in violation of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(iii) collects any amount as tax but fails to pay the same to the Government beyond a period of three 
months from the date on which such payment becomes due;  
(iv) collects any tax in contravention of the provisions of this Act but fails to pay the same to the 
Government beyond a period of three months from the date on which such payment becomes due;  
(v) fails to deduct the tax in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 51, or 
deducts an amount which is less than the amount required to be deducted under the said sub -section, 
or where he fails to pay to the Government under sub -section ( 2) thereof, the amount deducted as tax;  
(vi) fails to collect tax in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 52, or 
collects an amount which is less than the amount required to be collected under the said sub -section 
or where he fails to pay to the Government the amount collected as tax under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 52;  
(vii) takes or utilises input tax credit without actual receipt of goods or services or both either 
fully or partially, in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(viii) fraudulently obtains refund of tax under this Act;  
(ix) takes or distributes input tax credit in contravention of section 20, or the rules made 
thereunder;  
(x) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake accounts or documents or furnishes 
any false information or return with an intention to evade payment of tax due under this Act;  
(xi) is liable to be registered under this Act but fails to obtain registration;  
(xii) furnishes any false information with regard to registration particulars, either at the time of 
applying for registration, or subsequently;  
(xiii) obstructs or prevents any officer in discharge of his duties under this Act;  
(xiv) transports any taxable goods without the cover of documents as may be specified in this 
behalf;  
(xv) suppresses his turnover leading to evasion of tax under this Act;  
(xvi) fails to keep, maintain or retain books of account and other documents in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(xvii) fails to furnish information or documents called for by an officer in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or furnishes false information or documents 
during any proceedings under this Act;  
(xviii) supplies, transports or stores any goods which he has reasons to believe are liable to 
confiscation under this Act;  
(xix) issues any invoice or document by using the registration number of another registered 
person;  
(xx) tampers with, or destroys any material evidence or document;  
97 
 (xxi) disposes of or tampers with any goods that have been detained, seized, or attached under this 
Act,  
shall be liable to pay a penalty of ten thousand rupees or an amount equivalent to the tax evaded or the tax not 
deducted under section 51 or short deducted or deducted but not paid to the Government or tax not collected 
under section 52 or short collected or collected but not paid to the Government or input tax credit availed of or 
passed on or distributed irregularly, or the refund claimed fraudulently, whichever is higher.  
1[(1A) Any person who retains the benefit of a transaction covered under clauses ( i), (ii), (vii) or 
clause ( ix) of sub -section ( 1) and at whose instance such transaction is conducted, shall be liable to a 
penalty of an amount equivalent to the tax evaded or input tax credit availed of or passed on.]  
(2) Any registered person who supplies any goods or services or both on which any tax has not been 
paid or short -paid or erroneously refunded, or where the input tax credit has been wrongly availed or 
utilised, — 
(a) for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of 
facts to evade tax, shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees or ten per cent. of the tax due 
from such person, whichever is higher;  
(b) for reason of fraud or any wilful  misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, shall be 
liable to a penalty equal to ten thousand rupees or the tax due from such person, whichever is higher.  
(3) Any person who –– 
(a) aids or abets any of the offences specified in clauses ( i) to ( xxi) of sub -section ( 1); 
(b) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himself in transporting, removing, depositing, 
keeping, concealing, supplying, or purchasing or in any other manner deals with any goods which he 
knows or has reasons to believe are liable to confiscation under this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(c) receives or is in any way concerned with the supply of, or in any other manner deals with any 
supply of services which he knows or has reasons to believe are in contravention of any provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(d) fails to appear before the officer of central tax, when issued with a summons for appearance to 
give evidence or produce a document in an inquiry;  
(e) fails to issue invoice in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder or fails to account for an invoice in his books of account,  
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
2[(1B) 3[Any electronic commerce operator, who is liable to collect tax at source under                  
section 52,] — 
(i) allows a supply of goods or services or both through it by an unregistered person other 
than a person exempted from registration by a notification issued under this Act to make such 
supply;  
(ii) allows an inter -State supply of goods or services or both through it by a person who is not 
eligible to make such inter -State supply; or  
(iii) fails to furnish the correct details in the statement to be furnished under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 52 of any outward supply of goods effected through it by a person exempted from 
obtaining registration under this Act,  
shall be liable to pay a penalty of ten thousand rupees, or an amount equivalent to the amount of tax 
involved had such supply been made by a registered person other than a person paying tax under                  
section 10, whichever is higher.]

1. Ins. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 126 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).

2. Ins. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 155 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 14 4, for “Any electronic commerce operator who”  (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
98 
 1[122A. Penalty for failure to register certain machines used in manufacture of goods as per 
special procedure .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any person, who is 
engaged in the manufacture of goods in respect of which any special procedure relating to registration of 
machines has been notified under section 148, acts in contravention of the said special procedure, he 
shall, in addition to any penalty that is paid or is payable by him under Chapter XV or any other 
provisions of this Chapter, be liable to pay a penalty equal to an amount of one lakh rupees for every 
machine  not so registered.  
(2) In addition to the penalty under sub -section ( 1), every machine not so registered shall be liable for 
seizure and confiscation:  
Provided that such machine shall not be confiscated where — 
(a) the penalty so imposed is paid; and  
(b) the registration of such machine is made in accordance with the special procedure within three 
days of the receipt of communication of the order of penalty.]

123. Penalty for failure to furnish information return. ––If a person who is required to furnish an 
information return under section 150 fails to do so within the period specified in the notice issued under          
sub-section ( 3) thereof, the proper officer may direct that such person shall be liable to pay a penalty of one 
hundred rupees for each day of the period during which the failure to furnish such return continues:  
Provided that the penalty imposed under this section shall not exceed five thousand rupees.

124. Fine for failure to furnish statistics .—If any person required to furnish any information or return 
under section 151, — 
  (a) without reasonable cause fails to furnish such information or return as may be required under 
that section, or  
 (b) wilfully  furnishes or causes to furnish any information or return which he knows to be false,  
he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and in case of a continuing 
offence to a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day after the first day during 
which the offence continues subject to a maximum limit of twenty -five thousand rupees.

125. General penalty. —Any person, who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any 
rules made thereunder for which no penalty is separately provided for in this Act, shall be liable to a 
penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.

126. General disciplines related to penalty .—(1) No officer under this Act shall impose any penalty 
for minor breaches of tax regulations or procedural requirements and in particular, any omission or 
mistake in documentation which is easily rectifiable and made without fraudulent intent or gross 
negligence.  
Explanation .––For the purpose of this sub -section, –– 
(a) a breach shall be considered a ‘minor breach’ if the amount of tax involved is less than five 
thousand rupees;  
(b) an omission or mistake in documentation shall be considered to be easily rectifiable if the 
same is an error apparent on the face of record.  
(2) The penalty imposed under this Act shall depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and 
shall be commensurate with the degree and severity of the breach.  
(3) No penalty shall be imposed on any person without giving him an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The officer under this Act shall while imposing penalty in an order for a breach of any law, 
regulation or procedural requirement, specify the nature of the breach and the applicable law, regulation 
or procedure under which the amount of penalty for the breach has been specified.

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2024, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2024).  
99 
 (5) When a person voluntarily discloses to an officer under this Act the circumstances of a breach of the 
tax law, regulation or procedural requirement prior to the discovery of the breach by the officer under this 
Act, the proper officer may consider this fact as a mitigating factor when quantifying a penalty for that 
person.  
(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply in such cases where the penalty specified under this 
Act is either a fixed sum or expressed as a fixed percentage.

127. Power to impose penalty in certain cases .—Where the proper officer is of the view that a person is 
liable to a penalty and the same is not covered under any proceedings under section 62 or section 63 or  section 
64 or section 73 or section 74  1[or section 74A ] or section 129 or section 130, he may issue an order 
levying such penalty after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such person.

128. Power to waive penalty or fee or both .—The Government may, by notification, waive in part or 
full, any penalty referred to in section 122 or section 123 or section 125 or any late fee referred to in              
section 47 for such class of taxpayers and under such mitigating circumstances as may be specified therein on 
the recommendations of the Council.  
2[128A. Waiver of interest or penalty or both relating to demands raised under section 73, for 
certain tax periods .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, where any 
amount of tax is payable by a person chargeable with tax in accordance with, — 
(a) a notice issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 73 or a statement issued under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 73, and where no order under sub -section (9) of section 73 has been issued; or  
(b) an order passed under sub -section ( 9) of section 73, and where no order under                    
sub-section ( 11) of section 107 or sub -section ( 1) of section 108 has been passed; or  
(c) an order passed under sub -section ( 11) of section 107 or sub -section ( 1) of section 108, and 
where no order under sub -section ( 1) of section 113 has been passed,  
pertaining to the period from 1st July, 2017 to 31st March, 2020, or a part thereof, and the said person 
pays the full amount of tax payable as per the notice or statement or the order referred to in clause ( a), 
clause ( b) or clause ( c), as the case may be, on or before the date, as may be notified by the Government 
on the recommendations of the Council, no interest under section 50 and penalty under this Act, shall be 
payable and all the proceedings in respect of the said notice or order or statement, as the case may be, 
shall be deemed to be concluded, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where a notice has been issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 74, and an order is 
passed or required to be passed by the proper officer in pursuance of the direction of the Appellate 
Authority or Appellate Tribunal or a court in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of                
section 75, the said notice or order shall be considered to be a notice or order, as the case may be, referred 
to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of this sub -section:  
Provided further that the conclusion of the proceedings under this sub -section, in cases where an 
application is filed under sub -section ( 3) of section 107 or under sub -section ( 3) of section 112 or an 
appeal is filed by an officer of central tax under sub -section ( 1) of section 117 or under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 118 or where any proceedings are initiated under sub -section ( 1) of section 108, against an order 
referred to in clause ( b) or clause ( c) or against the directions of the Appellate Authority or the Appellate 
Tribunal or the court referred to in the first proviso, shall be subject to the condition that the said person 
pays the additional amount of tax payable, if any, in accordance with the order of the Appellate Authority 
or the Appellate Tribunal or the court or the Revisional Authority, as the case may be, within three 
months from the date of the said order:  
Provided also that where such interest and penalty has already been paid, no refund of the same shall 
be available.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 14 5 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by s. 14 6, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-11-2024).  
100 
 (2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall be applicable in respect of any amount payable by the 
person on account of erroneous refund.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall be applicable in respect of cases where an appeal or 
writ petition filed by the said person is pending before Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or a 
court, as the case may be, and has not been withdrawn by the said person on or before the date notified 
under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any amount specified under sub -section ( 1) 
has been paid and the proceedings are deemed to be concluded under the said sub -section, no appeal 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 107 or sub -section ( 1) of section 112 shall lie against an order referred to 
in clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), as the case may be.]

129. Detention, seizure and release of goods and conveyances in transit. ––(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, where any person transports any goods or stores any goods while they are in 
transit in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, all such goods and 
conveyance used as a means of transport for carrying the said goods and documents relating to such goods 
and conveyance shall be liable to detention or seizure and after detention or seizure, shall be released, –– 
1[(a) on payment of penalty equal to two hundred per cent. of the tax payable on such goods and, 
in case of exempted goods, on payment of an amount equal to two per cent. of the value of goods or 
twenty -five thousand rupees, whichever is less, where the owner of the goods comes forward for 
payment of such penalty;  
(b) on payment of penalty equal to fifty per cent. of the value of the goods or two hundred per 
cent. of the tax payable on such goods, whichever is higher, and in case of exempted goods, on 
payment of an amount equal to five per cent. of the value of goods or twenty -five thousand rupees, 
whichever is less, where the owner of the goods does not come forward for payment of such penalty;]  
 (c) upon furnishing a security equivalent to the amount payable under clause ( a) or clause ( b) in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such goods or conveyance shall be detained or seized without serving an order of 
detention or seizure on the person transporting the goods.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[(3) The proper officer detaining or seizing goods or conveyance shall issue a notice within seven 
days of such detention or seizure, specifying the penalty payable, and thereafter, pass an order within a 
period of seven days from the date of service of such notice, for payment of penalty under clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1).] 
(4) 4[No penalty] shall be determined under sub -section ( 3) without giving the person concerned an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(5) On payment of amount referred in sub-section ( 1), all proceedings in respect of the notice 
specified in sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be concluded.  
5[(6) Where the person transporting any goods or the owner of such goods fails to pay the amount of 
penalty under sub -section ( 1) within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the copy of the order passed 
under sub -section ( 3), the goods or conveyance so detained or seized shall be liable to be sold or disposed 
of otherwise, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed, to recover the penalty payable 
under sub -section ( 3):

1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 117, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

2. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by  s. 117, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

3. Subs. by s. 117, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

4. Subs. by  s. 117, ibid., for “No tax, interest or penalty” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

5. Subs. by s. 117, ibid., for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).  
101 
 Provided that the conveyance shall be released on payment by the transporter of penalty under                 
sub-section ( 3) or one lakh rupees, whichever is less:  
Provided further that where the detained or seized goods are perishable or hazardous in nature or are 
likely to depreciate in value with passage of time, the said period of fifteen days may be reduced by the 
proper officer.]  
 130. Confiscation of goods or conveyances and levy of penalty. ––(1) 1[Where] any person — 
(i) supplies or receives any goods in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder with intent to evade payment of tax; or  
(ii) does not account for any goods on which he is liable to pay tax under this Act; or  
(iii) supplies any goods liable to tax under this Act without having applied for registration; or  
(iv) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder with intent to 
evade payment of tax; or  
(v) uses any conveyance as a means of transport for carriage of goods in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder unless the owner of the conveyance proves that it 
was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the 
person in charge of the conveyance,  
then, all such goods or conveyances shall be liable to confiscation and the person shall be liable to penalty 
under section 122.  
(2) Whenever confiscation of any goods or conveyance is authorised by this Act, the officer 
adjudging it shall give to the owner of the goods an option to pay in lieu of confiscation, such fine as the 
said officer thinks fit:  
Provided that such fine leviable shall not exceed the market value of the goods confiscated, less the 
tax chargeable thereon:  
Provided further that the aggregate of such fine and penalty leviable shall not be less than the                 
2[penalty equal to hundred per cent. of the tax payable on such goods]:  
Provided also that where any such conveyance is used for the carriage of the goods or passengers for 
hire, the owner of the conveyance shall be given an option to pay in lieu of the confiscation of the 
conveyance a fine equal to the tax payable on the goods being transported thereon.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(4) No order for confiscation of goods or conveyance or for imposition of penalty shall be issued 
without giving the person an opportunity of being heard.  
(5) Where any goods or conveyance are confiscated under this Act, the title of such goods or 
conveyance shall thereupon vest in the Government.  
(6) The proper officer adjudging confiscation shall take and hold possession of the things confiscated 
and every officer of Police, on the requisition of such proper officer, shall assist him in taking and holding 
such possession.  
(7) The proper officer may, after satisfying himself that the confiscated goods or conveyance are not 
required in any other proceedings under this Act and after giving reasonable time not exceeding three 
months to pay fine in lieu of confiscation, dispose of such goods or conveyance and deposit the sale 
proceeds thereof with the Government.

131. Confiscation or penalty not to interfere with other punishments. ––Without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974) , no confiscation made or penalty

1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021 , s. 118, for “Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

2. Subs. by s. 118,  ibid. for “amount of penalty leviable under sub -section ( 1) of section 129” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

3. Sub-section ( 3) omitted, by s. 118, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).  
102 
 imposed under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall prevent the infliction of any other 
punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act or under any other 
law for the time being in force.

132. Punishment for certain offences. ––(1) 1[Whoever commits, or causes to commit and retain the 
benefits arising out of, any of the following offences ], namely: — 
(a) supplies any goods or services or both without issue of any invoice, in violation of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, with the intention to evade tax;  
(b) issues any invoice or bill without supply of goods or services or both in violation of the 
provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder leading to wrongful availment or utilisation of 
input tax credit or refund of tax;  
2[(c) avails input tax credit using the invoice or bill referred to in clause ( b) or fraudulently avails 
input tax credit without any invoice or bill;]  
(d) collects any amount as tax but fails to pay the same to the Government beyond a period of three 
months from the date on which such payment becomes due;  
(e) evades tax  3*** or fraudulently obtains refund and where such offence is not covered under 
clauses ( a) to ( d); 
(f) falsifies or substitutes financial records or produces fake accounts or documents or furnishes 
any false information with an intention to evade payment of tax due under this Act;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
(h) acquires possession of, or in any way concerns himself in transporting, removing, depositing, 
keeping, concealing, supplying, or purchasing or in any other manner deals with, any goods which he 
knows or has reasons to believe are liable to confiscation under this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(i) receives or is in any way concerned with the supply of, or in any other manner deals with any 
supply of services which he knows or has reasons to believe are in contravention of any provisions of this 
Act or the rules made thereunder;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
4*   *   *   *  * 
(l) attempts to commit, or abets the commission of any of the offences mentioned in 5[clauses ( a) 
to (f) and clauses ( h) and ( i)] of this section,  
shall be punishable –– 
(i) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or 
utilised or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds five hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years and with fine;  
(ii) in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or 
utilised or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds two hundred lakh rupees but does not exceed 
five hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with 
fine; 
(iii) in the case of 6[an offence specified in clause ( b),] where the amount of tax evaded or the 
amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised or the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds 
one hundred lakh rupees but does not exceed two hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and with fine;

1. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 127, for “Whoever commits any of the following offences” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).

2.  Subs. by s. 127, ibid.,  for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).

3. The words “, fraudulently avails input tax credit” omitted by s. 127, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).

4. Clauses ( g), (j) and ( k) omitted by Act 8 of 2023, s. 156, (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

5. Subs. by s. 156, ibid., for the words brackets and letters “ clauses ( a) to ( k)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

6. Subs. by s. 156, ibid., for “ any other offence” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
103 
 (iv) in cases where he commits or abets the commission of an offence specified in clause ( f) 1***, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with 
both.  
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence under this section is again convicted of an offence 
under this section, then, he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.  
(3) The imprisonment referred to in clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) 
shall, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of the 
Court, be for a term not less than six months.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all 
offences under this Act, except the offences referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall be non -cognizable and 
bailable.  
(5) The offences specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) and 
punishable under clause ( i) of that sub -section shall be cognizable and non -bailable.  
(6) A person shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section except with the previous 
sanction of the Commissioner.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the term “tax” shall include the amount of tax evaded or 
the amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised or refund wrongly taken under the provisions of 
this Act, the State Goods and Services Tax Act, the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act and cess levied under the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to 
States) Act.