3. Ins. by s. 110 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018,  s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
52 
 (c) any other amount payable under this Act or the rules made thereunder including the demand 
determined under section 73 or section 74  1[or section 74A].  
(9) Every person who has paid the tax on goods or services or both under this Act shall, unless the 
contrary is proved by him, be deemed to have passed on the full incidence of such tax to the recipient of 
such goods or services or both.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) the date of credit to the account of the Government in the authorised bank shall be deemed to 
be the date of deposit in the electronic cash ledger;  
(b) the expression, — 
(i) “tax dues” means the tax payable under this Act and does not include interest, fee and 
penalty; and  
(ii) “other dues” means interest, penalty, fee or any other amount payable under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder.  
2[ 3[ (10) A registered person may, on the common portal, transfer any amount of tax, interest, penalty, 
fee or any other amount available in the electronic cash ledger under this Act, to the electronic cash ledger 
for,–– 
(a) integrated tax, central tax, State tax, Union territory tax or cess; or  
(b) integrated tax or central tax of a distinct person as specified in sub -section ( 4) or, as the case 
may be,  sub-section ( 5) of section 25,  
in such form and manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed and such 
transfer shall be deemed to be a refund from the electronic cash ledger under this Act:  
Provided that no such transfer under clause ( b) shall be allowed if the said registered person has 
any unpaid liability in his electronic liability register.]   
(11) Where any amount  has been transferred to the electronic cash ledger under this Act, the same 
shall be deemed to be deposited in the said ledger as provided in sub -section ( 1).] 
4[(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government may, on the recommendations 
of the Council, subject to such conditions and restrictions, specify such maximum proportion of output 
tax liability under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017  (13 of 2017)  which 
may be discharged through the electronic credit ledger by a registered person or a class of registered 
persons, as may be prescribed.]  
5[49A. Utilisation of input tax credit subject to certain conditions. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 49, the input tax credit on account of central tax, State tax or Union territory tax shall be 
utilised towards payment of integrated tax, central tax, State tax or Union territory tax, as the case may be, only 
after the input tax credit available on account of integrated tax has first been utilised fully towards such 
payment.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 12 5 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 99 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

3. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 110, for sub-section 10 (w.e.f. 5 -7-2022).

4. Ins. by s. 110,  ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -7-2022).

5. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
53 
 49B. Order of utilisation of input tax credit .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter and 
subject to the provisions of clause ( e) and clause ( f) of sub -section ( 5) of section 49, the Government may, on 
the recommendations of the Council, prescribe the order and manner of utilisation of the input tax credit on 
account of integrated tax, central tax, State tax or Union territory tax, as the case may be, towards payment of 
any such tax.]

50. Interest on delayed payment of tax .—(1) Every person who is liable to pay tax in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, but fails to pay the tax or any part thereof to the 
Government within the period prescribed, shall for the period for which the tax or any part thereof remains 
unpaid, pay, on his own, interest at such rate, not exceeding eighteen per cent., as may be notified by the 
Government on the recommendations of the Council.  
1[Provided that the interest on tax payable in respect of supplies made during a tax period and declared in 
the return for the said period furnished after the due date in accordance with the provisions of section 39, 
except where such return is furnished after commencement of any proceedings under section 73 or section 74  
2[or section 74A]  in respect of the said period, shall be payable on that portion of the tax which is paid by 
debiting the electronic cash ledger.]  
(2) The interest under sub -section ( 1) shall be calculated, in such manner as may be prescribed, from 
the day succeeding the day on which such tax was due to be paid.  
3[(3) Where the input tax credit has been wrongly availed and utilised, the registered person shall pay 
interest on such input tax credit wrongly availed and utilised, at such rate not exceeding twenty -four                
per cent. as may be notified by the Government, on the recommendations of the Council, and the interest 
shall be calculated, in such manner as may be prescribed.]

51. Tax deduction at source .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, 
the Government may mandate, –– 
(a) a department or establishment of the Central Government or State Government; or  
(b) local authority; or  
(c) Governmental agencies; or  
(d) such persons or category of persons as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council,  
(hereafter in this section referred to as “the deductor”), to deduct tax at the rate of one per cent. from the 
payment made or credited to the supplier (hereafter in this section referred to as “the deductee”) of 
taxable goods or services or both, where the total value of such supply, under a contract, exceeds two lakh 
and fifty thousand rupees:  
Provided that no deduction shall be made if the location of the supplier and the place of supply is in a 
State or Union territory which is different from the State or as the case may be, Union territory of 
registration of the recipient.  
Explanation .––For the purpose of deduction of tax specified above, the value of supply shall be taken 
as the amount excluding the central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated tax and cess indicated in 
the invoice.

1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 112, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -6-2021) .

2. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 12 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

3. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 111, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  
54 
 (2) The amount deducted as tax under this section shall be paid to the Government by the deductor 
within ten days after the end of the month in which such deduction is made, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
1[(3) A certificate of tax deduction at source shall be issued in such form and in such manner as may 
be prescribed .] 
2*   *  *   *   * 
(5) The deductee shall claim credit, in his electronic cash ledger, of the tax deducted and reflected in 
the return of the deductor furnished under sub -section ( 3) of section 39, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) If any deductor  fails to pay to the Government the amount deducted as tax under sub -section ( 1), 
he shall pay interest in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 50, in addition to the 
amount of tax deducted.  
(7) The determination of the amount in default under this section shall be made in the manner 
specified in section 73 or section 74  3[or section 74A].  
(8) The refund to the deductor or the deductee arising on account of excess or erroneous deduction 
shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of section 54:  
Provided that no refund to the deductor shall be granted, if the amount deducted has been credited to 
the electronic cash ledger of the deductee.

52. Collection of tax at source .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, 
every electronic commerce operator (hereafter in this section referred to as the “operator”), not being an 
agent, shall collect an amount calculated at such rate not exceeding one per cent., as may be notified by 
the Government on the recommendations of the Council, of the net value of taxable supplies made 
through it by other suppliers where the consideration with respect to such supplies is to be collected by 
the operator.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “net value of taxable supplies” 
shall mean the aggregate value of taxable supplies of goods or services or both, other than services 
notified under sub -section ( 5) of section 9, made during any month by all registered persons through the 
operator reduced by the aggregate value of taxable supplies returned to the suppliers during the said 
month.  
(2) The power to collect the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be without prejudice to any 
other mode of recovery from the operator.  
(3) The amount collected under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid to the Government by the operator 
within ten days after the end of the month in which such collection is made, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Every operator who collects the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall furnish a statement, 
electronically, containing the details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected through it, 
including the supplies of goods or services or both returned through it, and the amount collected under 
sub-section ( 1) during a month, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, within ten days after the 
end of such month.  
4[Provided that the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, extend 
the time limit for furnishing the statement for such class of registered persons as may be specified therein:

1. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 124, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).

2. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by s. 124, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).

3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 12 7 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

4. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 101 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
55 
 Provided further that any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of State tax or the 
Commissioner of Union territory tax shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.]  
(5) Every operator who collects the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall furnish an annual 
statement, electronically, containing the details of outward supplies of goods or services or both effected 
through it, including the supplies of goods or services or both returned through it, and the amount 
collected under the said sub -section during the financial year, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, before the thirty first day of December following the end of such financial year.  
1[Provided that the Commissioner may, on the recommendations of the Council and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, by notification, extend the time limit for furnishing the annual statement for such 
class of registered persons as may be specified therein:  
Provided further that any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of State tax or the 
Commissioner of Union territory tax shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.]  
(6) If any operator after furnishing a statement under sub -section ( 4) discovers any omission or 
incorrect particulars therein, other than as a result of scrutiny, audit, inspection or enforcement activity by 
the tax authorities, he shall rectify such omission or incorrect particulars in the statement to be furnished 
for the month during which such omission or incorrect particulars are noticed, subject to payment of 
interest, as specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 50:  
Provided that no such rectification of any omission or incorrect particulars shall be allowed after the 
2[thirtieth day of November ] following the end of the financial year or the actual date of furnishing of the 
relevant annual statement, whichever is earlier.  
(7) The supplier who has supplied the goods or services or both through the operator shall claim 
credit, in his electronic cash ledger, of the amount collected and reflected in the statement of the operator 
furnished under sub -section ( 4), in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(8) The details of supplies furnished by every operator under sub-section ( 4) shall be matched with the 
corresponding details of outward supplies furnished by the concerned supplier registered under this Act in such 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(9) Where the details of outward supplies furnished by the operator under sub -section ( 4) do not 
match with the corresponding details furnished by the supplier under 3[section 37  or section 39] , the 
discrepancy shall be communicated to both persons in such manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed.  
(10) The amount in respect of which any discrepancy is communicated under sub -section ( 9) and 
which is not rectified by the supplier in his valid return or the operator in his statement for the month in 
which discrepancy is communicated, shall be added to the output tax liability of the said supplier, where 
the value of outward supplies furnished by the operator is more than the value of outward supplies 
furnished by the supplier, in his return for the month succeeding the month in which the discrepancy is 
communicated in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(11) The concerned supplier, in whose output tax liability any amount has been added under                     
sub-section ( 10), shall pay the tax payable in respect of such supply along with interest, at the rate 
specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 on the amount so added from the date such tax was due till 
the date of its payment.  
(12) Any authority not below the rank of Deputy Commissioner may serve a notice, either before or 
during the course of any proceedings under this Act, requiring the operator to furnish such details relating 
to— 
(a) supplies of goods or services or both effected through such operator during any period; or

1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 101 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 112, for “ due date for furnishing of statement for the month of September” (w.e.f. 1-10-2022).

3. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 22, for “section 37” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
56 
 (b) stock of goods held by the suppliers making supplies through such operator in the godowns or 
warehouses, by whatever name called, managed by such operator and declared as additional places of 
business by such suppliers,  
as may be specified in the notice.  
(13) Every operator on whom a notice has been served under sub -section ( 12) shall furnish the 
required information within fifteen working days of the date of service of such notice.  
(14) Any person who fails to furnish the information required by the notice served under                       
sub-section ( 12) shall, without prejudice to any action that may be taken under section 122, be liable to a 
penalty which may extend to twenty -five thousand rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “concerned supplier” shall mean the 
supplier of goods or services or both making supplies through the operator.  
1[(15) The operator shall not be allowed to furnish a statement under sub -section ( 4) after the expiry 
of a period of three years from the due date of furnishing the said statement:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, subject 
to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow an operator or a class of operators to 
furnish a statement under sub -section ( 4), even after the expiry of the said period of three years from the 
due date of furnishing the said statement.]

53. Transfer of input tax credit .—On utilisation of input tax credit availed under this Act for 
payment of tax dues under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -section ( 5) of section 49, as reflected in the valid return furnished under sub -section ( 1) of                 
section 39, the amount collected as central tax shall stand reduced by an amount equal to such credit so 
utilised and the Central Government shall transfer an amount equal to the amount so reduced from the 
central tax account to the integrated tax account in such manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed.  
2[53A. Transfer of certain amounts. —Where any amount has been transferred from the electronic 
cash ledger under this Act to the electronic cash ledger under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the 
Union territory Goods and Services Tax Act, the Government shall, transfer to the State tax account or the 
Union territory tax account, an amount equal to the amount  transferred from the electronic cash ledger, in 
such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.]  
CHAPTER XI  
REFUNDS

54. Refund of tax. —(1) Any person claiming refund of any tax and interest, if any, paid on such tax 
or any other amount paid by him, may make an application before the expiry of two years from the 
relevant date in such form and manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a registered person, claiming refund of any balance in the electronic cash ledger in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 6) of section 49, may claim such refund in 3[such from and] 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) A specialised  agency of the United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral Financial Institution 
and Organisation notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 (46 of 1947), 
Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries or any other person or class of persons, as notified under 
section 55, entitled to a refund of tax paid by it on inward supplies of goods or services or both, may 
make an application for such refund, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, before the expiry of 
4[two years] from the last day of the quarter in which such supply was received.

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 145 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 102 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

3. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 113, for “ the return furnished under section 39 in such” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Subs. by s. 113,  ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).  
57 
 (3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 10), a registered person may claim refund of any 
unutilised input tax credit at the end of any tax period:  
Provided that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be allowed in cases other than –– 
(i) zero rated supplies made without payment of tax;  
(ii) where the credit has accumulated on account of rate of tax on inputs being higher than the rate 
of tax on output supplies (other than nil rated or fully exempt supplies), except supplies of goods or 
services or both as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council:  
1*   *   *   *   * 
Provided also that no refund of input tax credit shall be allowed, if the supplier of goods or services or 
both avails of drawback in respect of central tax or claims refund of the integrated tax paid on such 
supplies.  
(4) The application shall be accompanied by — 
(a) such documentary evidence as may be prescribed to establish that a refund is due to the 
applicant; and  
(b) such documentary or other evidence (including the documents referred to in section 33) as the 
applicant may furnish to establish that the amount of tax and interest, if any, paid on such tax or any 
other amount paid in relation to which such refund is claimed was collected from, or paid by, him and 
the incidence of such tax and interest had not been passed on to any other person:  
Provided that where the amount claimed as refund is less than two lakh rupees, it shall not be 
necessary for the applicant to furnish any documentary and other evidences but he may file a declaration, 
based on the documentary or other evidences available with him, certifying that the incidence of such tax 
and interest had not been passed on to any other person.  
(5) If, on receipt of any such application, the proper officer is satisfied that the whole or part of the 
amount claimed as refund is refundable, he may make an order accordingly and the amount so determined 
shall be credited to the Fund referred to in section 57.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the proper officer may, in the case of any 
claim for refund on account of zero -rated supply of goods or services or both made by registered persons, 
other than such category of registered persons as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council, refund on a provisional basis, ninety per cent. of the total amount so 
claimed, 2*** in such manner and subject to such conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be 
prescribed and thereafter make an order under sub -section ( 5) for final settlement of the refund claim after 
due verification of documents furnished by the applicant.  
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 5) within sixty days from the date of 
receipt of application complete in all respects.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the refundable amount shall, instead of 
being credited to the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if such amount is relatable to — 
(a) refund of tax paid on 3[export]  of goods or services or both or on inputs or input services used 
in making such 3[exports] ; 
(b) refund of unutilised input tax credit under sub -section ( 3); 
(c) refund of tax paid on a supply which is not provided, either wholly or partially, and for which 
invoice has not been issued, or where a refund voucher has been issued;

1. Second proviso  omitted by Act 15 of 2024, s. 12 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Certain words omitted by Act 8 of 2023, s. 146 (w.e.f. 1-10-2023).

3. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 23 for “zero -rated supplies” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
58 
 (d) refund of tax in pursuance of section 77;  
(e) the tax and interest, if any, or any other amount paid by the applicant, if he had not passed on 
the incidence of such tax and interest to any other person; or  
(f) the tax or interest borne by such other class of applicants as the Government may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify.  
1[(8A) The Government may disburse the refund of the State tax in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
(9) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree, order or direction of 
the Appellate Tribunal or any court or in any other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or 
in any other law for the time being in force, no refund shall be made except in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 8). 
(10) Where any refund is due 2*** to a registered person who has defaulted in furnishing any return 
or who is required to pay any tax, interest or penalty, which has not been stayed by any court, Tribunal or 
Appellate Authority by the specified date, the proper officer may— 
(a) withhold payment of refund due until the said person has furnished the return or paid the tax, 
interest or penalty, as the case may be;  
(b) deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other amount which the 
taxable person is liable to pay but which remains unpaid under this Act or under the existing law . 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “specified date” shall mean the 
last date for filing an appeal under this Act.  
(11) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the subject matter of an appeal or further proceedings or 
where any other proceedings under this Act is pending and the Commissioner is of the opinion that grant of 
such refund is likely to adversely affect the revenue in the said appeal or other proceedings on account of 
malfeasance or fraud committed, he may, after giving the taxable person an opportunity of being heard, 
withhold the refund till such time as he may determine.  
(12) Where a refund is withheld under sub -section ( 11), the taxable person shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 56, be entitled to interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. as may be 
notified on the recommendations of the Council, if as a result of the appeal or further proceedings he 
becomes entitled to refund.  
(13) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the amount of advance tax 
deposited by a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person under sub -section ( 2) of section 27, 
shall not be refunded unless such person has, in respect of the entire period for which the certificate of 
registration granted to him had remained in force, furnished all the returns required under section 39.  
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no refund under sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 6) 
shall be paid to an applicant, if the amount is less than one thousand rupees.  
3[(15) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no refund of unutilised input tax credit on 
account of zero rated supply of goods or of integrated tax paid on account of zero rated supply of goods 
shall be allowed where such zero rated supply of goods is subjected to export duty.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, –– 
(1) “refund” includes refund of tax paid on zero -rated supplies of goods or services or both or on 
inputs or input services used in making such zero -rated supplies, or refund of tax on the supply of 
goods regarded as deemed exports, or refund of unutilised input tax credit as provided under sub -
section ( 3).

1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 103 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2019).

2. The words  “under sub -section ( 3)” omitted by Act 6 of 2022, s. 113 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 12 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
59 
 (2) “relevant date” means — 
(a) in the case of goods exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is available in 
respect of goods themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or input services used in such 
goods, –– 
(i) if the goods are exported by sea or air, the date on which the ship or the aircraft in 
which such goods are loaded, leaves India; or  
(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on which such goods pass the frontier; or  
(iii) if the goods are exported by post, the date of despatch of goods by the Post Office 
concerned to a place outside India;  
(b) in the case of supply of goods regarded as deemed exports where a refund of tax paid is 
available in respect of the goods, the date on which the return relating to such deemed exports is 
furnished;  
1[(ba) in case of zero -rated supply of goods or services or both to a Special Economic Zone 
developer or a Special Economic Zone unit where a refund of tax paid is available in respect of 
such supplies themselves, or as the case may be, the inputs or input services used in such 
supplies, the due date for furnishing of return under section 39 in respect of such supplies;]  
(c) in the case of services exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is available in 
respect of services themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or input services used in such 
services, the date of –– 
(i) receipt of payment in convertible foreign exchange 2[or in Indian rupees wherever 
permitted by the Reserve Bank of India] , where the supply of services had been completed 
prior to the receipt of such payment; or  
(ii) issue of invoice, where payment for the services had been received in advance prior to 
the date of issue of the invoice;  
(d) in case where the tax becomes refundable as a consequence of judgment, decree, order or 
direction of the Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court, the date of communication 
of such judgment, decree, order or direction;  
3[(e) in the case of refund of unutilised input tax credit under clause ( ii) of the first proviso 
to sub -section ( 3), the due date for furnishing of return under section 39 for the period in which 
such claim for refund arises;]  
(f) in the case where tax is paid provisionally under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the date 
of adjustment of tax after the final assessment thereof;  
(g) in the case of a person, other than the supplier, the date of receipt of goods or services or 
both by such person; and  
(h) in any other case, the date of payment of tax.

55. Refund in certain cases. ––The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by 
notification, specify any specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral 
Financial Institution and Organisation notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities)               
Act, 1947 (46 of 1947), Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries and any other person or class of 
persons as may be specified in this behalf, who shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be 
prescribed, be entitled to claim a refund of taxes paid on the notified supplies of goods or services or both 
received by them.

1. Ins. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 113 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Subs. by s. 23,  ibid., for sub -clause ( e) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
60 
 56. Interest on delayed refunds. ––If any tax ordered to be refunded under sub -section ( 5) of               
section 54 to any applicant is not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of application under         
sub-section ( 1) of that section, interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent. as may be specified in the 
notification issued by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be payable in respect 
of such refund 1[for the period of delay beyond sixty days from the date of receipt of such application till 
the date of refund of such tax, to be computed in such manner and subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as may be prescribed ]: 
Provided that where any claim of refund arises from an order passed by an adjudicating authority or 
Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court which has attained finality and the same is not 
refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of application filed consequent to such order, interest 
at such rate not exceeding nine per cent. as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations 
of the Council shall be payable in respect of such refund from the date immediately after the expiry of 
sixty days from the date of receipt of application till the date of refund.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, where any order of refund is made by an Appellate 
Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court against an order of the proper officer under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 54, the order passed by the Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal or by the court shall be 
deemed to be an order passed under the said sub -section ( 5).

57. Consumer Welfare Fund. —The Government shall constitute a Fund, to be called the Consumer 
Welfare Fund and there shall be credited to the Fund, — 
(a) the amount referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 54;  
(b) any income from investment of the amount credited to the Fund; and  
(c) such other monies received by it,  
in such manner as may be prescribed.

58. Utilisation of Fund. —(1) All sums credited to the Fund shall be utilised  by the Government for 
the welfare of the consumers in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Government or the authority specified by it shall maintain proper and separate account and 
other relevant records in relation to the Fund and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as 
may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
CHAPTER XII  
ASSESSMENT

59. Self -assessment. —Every registered person shall self -assess the taxes payable under this Act and 
furnish a return for each tax period as specified under section 39.

60. Provisional assessment. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), where the taxable person 
is unable to determine the value of goods or services or both or determine the rate of tax applicable thereto, 
he may request the proper officer in writing giving reasons for payment of tax on a provisional basis and the 
proper officer shall pass an order, within a period not later than ninety days from the date of receipt of such 
request, allowing payment of tax on provisional basis at such rate or on such value as may be specified by 
him. 
(2) The payment of tax on provisional basis may be allowed, if the taxable person executes a bond in such 
form as may be prescribed, and with such surety or security as the proper officer may deem fit, binding the 
taxable person for payment of the difference between the amount of tax as may be finally assessed and the 
amount of tax provisionally assessed.  
(3) The proper officer shall, within a period not exceeding six months from the date of the 
communication of the order issued under sub -section ( 1), pass the final assessment order after taking into 
account such information as may be required for finalizing the assessment:

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 147, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
61 
 Provided that the period specified in this sub -section may, on sufficient cause being shown and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, be extended by the Joint Commissioner or Additional Commissioner 
for a further period not exceeding six months and by the Commissioner for such further period not 
exceeding four years.  
(4) The registered person shall be liable to pay interest on any tax payable on the supply of goods or 
services or both under provisional assessment but not paid on the due date specified under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 39 or the rules made thereunder, at the rate specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 50, from the first 
day after the due date of payment of tax in respect of the said supply of goods or services or both till the date of 
actual payment, whether such amount is paid before or after the issuance of order for final assessment.  
(5) Where the registered person is entitled to a refund consequent to the order of final assessment 
under sub -section ( 3), subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 8) of section 54, interest shall be paid on 
such refund as provided in section 56.

61. Scrutiny of returns .––(1) The proper officer may scrutinize the return and related particulars furnished 
by the registered person to verify the correctness of the return and inform him of the discrepancies noticed, if 
any, in such manner as may be prescribed and seek his explanation thereto.  
(2) In case the explanation is found acceptable, the registered person shall be informed accordingly 
and no further action shall be taken in this regard.  
(3) In case no satisfactory explanation is furnished within a period of thirty days of being informed by 
the proper officer or such further period as may be permitted by him or where the registered person, after 
accepting the discrepancies, fails to take the corrective measure in his return for the month in which the 
discrepancy is accepted, the proper officer may initiate appropriate action including those under section 65 
or section 66 or section 67, or proceed to determine the tax and other dues under section 73 or section 74  
1[or section 74A] .

62. Assessment of non -filers of returns .––(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
section 73 or section 74  2[or section 74A],  where a registered person fails to furnish the return under section 
39 or section 45, even after the service of a notice under section 46, the proper officer may proceed to assess 
the tax liability of the said person to the best of his judgment taking into account all the relevant material 
which is available or which he has gathered and issue an assessment order within a period of five years from 
the date specified under section 44 for furnishing of the annual return for the financial year to which the tax 
not paid relates.  
(2) Where the registered person furnishes a valid return within 3[sixty days ] of the service of the 
assessment order under sub -section ( 1), the said assessment order shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn but the liability for payment of interest under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 or for payment of 
late fee under section 47 shall continue.  
4[Provided that where the registered person fails to furnish a valid return within sixty days of the 
service of the assessment order under sub-section ( 1), he may furnish the same within a further period of 
sixty days on payment of an additional late fee of one hundred rupees for each day of delay beyond sixty 
days of the service of the said assessment order and in case he furnishes valid return within such extended 
period, the said assessment order shall be deemed to have been withdrawn, but the liability to pay interest 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 or to pay late fee under section 47 shall continue .]

63. Assessment of unregistered persons .––Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
section 73 or section 74  5[or section 74A] , where a taxable person fails to obtain registration even though 
liable to do so or whose registration has been cancelled under sub -section ( 2) of section 29 but who was 
liable to pay tax, the proper officer may proceed to assess the tax liability of such taxable person to the 
best of his judgment for the relevant tax periods and issue an assessment order within a period of five 
years from the date specified under section 44 for furnishing of the annual return for the financial year to 
which the tax not paid relates:

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 12 9 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by s. 1 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 14 8, for “ thirty days” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

4. Ins. by s. 14 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

5. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 31 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
62 
 Provided that no such assessment order shall be passed without giving the person an opportunity of 
being heard.

64. Summary assessment in certain special cases .––(1) The proper officer may, on any evidence 
showing a tax liability of a person coming to his notice, with the previous permission of Additional 
Commissioner or Joint Commissioner, proceed to assess the tax liability of such person to protect the 
interest of revenue and issue an assessment order, if he has sufficient grounds to believe that any delay in 
doing so may adversely affect the interest of revenue:  
Provided that where the taxable person to whom the liability pertains is not ascertainable and such 
liability pertains to supply of goods, the person in charge of such goods shall be deemed to be the taxable 
person liable to be assessed and liable to pay tax and any other amount due under this section.  
(2) On an application made by the taxable person within thirty days from the date of receipt of order 
passed under sub -section ( 1) or on his own motion, if the Additional Commissioner or Joint 
Commissioner considers that such order is erroneous, he may withdraw such order and follow the 
procedure laid down in section 73 or section 74  1[or section 74A ]. 
CHAPTER XIII  
AUDIT

65. Audit by tax authorities. ––(1) The Commissioner or any officer authorised  by him, by way of a 
general or a specific order, may undertake audit of any registered person for such period, at such 
frequency and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) may conduct audit at the place of business of the 
registered person or in their office.  
(3) The registered person shall be informed by way of a notice not less than fifteen working days 
prior to the conduct of audit in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) The audit under sub -section ( 1) shall be completed within a period of three months from the date 
of commencement of the audit:  
Provided that where the Commissioner is satisfied that audit in respect of such registered person 
cannot be completed within three months, he may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the 
period by a further period not exceeding six months.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “commencement of audit” shall 
mean the date on which the records and other documents, called for by the tax authorities, are made 
available by the registered person or the actual institution of audit at the place of business, whichever is 
later.  
(5) During the course of audit, the authorised officer may require the registered person, — 
(i) to afford him the necessary facility to verify the books of account or other documents as he 
may require;  
(ii) to furnish such information as he may require and render assistance for timely completion of 
the audit.  
(6) On conclusion of audit, the proper officer shall, within thirty days, inform the registered person, 
whose records are audited, about the findings, his rights and obligations and the reasons for such findings.  
(7) Where the audit conducted under sub -section ( 1) results in detection of tax not paid or short paid 
or erroneously refunded, or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised, the proper officer may initiate 
action under section 73 or section 74  2[or section 74A] .

66. Special audit. ––(1) If at any stage of scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other proceedings before 
him, any officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner, having regard to the nature and complexity of 
the case and the interest of revenue, is of the opinion that the value has not been correctly declared or the credit 
availed is not within the normal limits, he may, with the prior approval of the Commissioner, direct such

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024 , s. 132 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by s. 1 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
63 
 registered person by a communication in writing to get his records including books of account examined and 
audited by a chartered accountant or a cost accountant as may be nominated by the Commissioner.  
(2) The chartered accountant or cost accountant so nominated shall, within the period of ninety days, 
submit a report of such audit duly signed and certified by him to the said Assistant Commissioner 
mentioning therein such other particulars as may be specified:  
Provided that the Assistant Commissioner may, on an application made to him in this behalf by the 
registered person or the chartered accountant or cost accountant or for any material and sufficient reason, 
extend the said period by a further period of ninety days.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding that the accounts of the 
registered person have been audited under any other provisions of this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force.  
(4) The registered person shall be given an opportunity of being heard in respect of any material 
gathered on the basis of special audit under sub -section ( 1) which is proposed to be used in any proceedings 
against him under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(5) The expenses of the examination and audit of records under sub -section ( 1), including the 
remuneration of such chartered accountant or cost accountant, shall be determined and paid by the 
Commissioner and such determination shall be final.  
(6) Where the special audit conducted under sub -section ( 1) results in detection of tax not paid or 
short paid or erroneously refunded, or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised, the proper officer may 
initiate action under section 73 or section 74  1[or section 74A] . 
CHAPTER XIV  
INSPECTION, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND ARREST

67. Power of inspection, search and seizure .––(1) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of 
Joint Commissioner, has reasons to believe that –– 
(a) a taxable person has suppressed any transaction relating to supply of goods or services or both or 
the stock of goods in hand, or has claimed input tax credit in excess of his entitlement under this Act or 
has indulged in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder to evade 
tax under this Act; or  
(b) any person engaged in the business of transporting goods or an owner or operator of a 
warehouse or a godown or any other place is keeping goods which have escaped payment of tax or 
has kept his accounts or goods in such a manner as is likely to cause evasion of tax payable under this 
Act, 
he may authorise in writing any other officer of central tax to inspect any places of business of the taxable 
person or the persons engaged in the business of transporting goods or the owner or the operator of 
warehouse or godown or any other place.  
(2) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, either pursuant to an inspection 
carried out under sub -section ( 1) or otherwise, has reasons to believe that any goods liable to confiscation or 
any documents or books or things, which in his opinion shall be useful for or relevant to any proceedings under 
this Act, are secreted in any place, he may authorise in writing any other officer of central tax to search and 
seize or may himself search and seize such goods, documents or books or things:  
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such goods, the proper officer, or any officer 
authorised by him, may serve on the owner or the custodian of the goods an order that he shall not 
remove, part with, or otherwise deal with the goods except with the previous permission of such officer:  
Provided further that the documents or books or things so seized shall be retained by such officer only 
for so long as may be necessary for their examination and for any inquiry or proceedings under this Act.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024 , s. 13 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
64 
 (3) The documents, books or things referred to in sub -section ( 2) or any other documents, books or 
things produced by a taxable person or any other person, which have not been relied upon for the issue of 
notice under this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall be returned to such person within a period not 
exceeding thirty days of the issue of the said notice.  
(4) The officer authorised under sub -section ( 2) shall have the power to seal or break open the door of any 
premises or to break open any almirah , electronic devices, box, receptacle in which any goods, accounts, 
registers or documents of the person are suspected to be concealed, where access to such premises, almirah , 
electronic devices, box or receptacle is denied.  
(5) The person from whose custody any documents are seized under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to 
make copies thereof or take extracts therefrom in the presence of an authorised officer at such place and 
time as such officer may indicate in this behalf except where making such copies or taking such extracts 
may, in the opinion of the proper officer, prejudicially affect the investigation.  
(6) The goods so seized under sub -section ( 2) shall be released, on a provisional basis, upon 
execution of a bond and furnishing of a security, in such manner and of such quantum, respectively, as 
may be prescribed or on payment of applicable tax, interest and penalty payable, as the case may be.  
(7) Where any goods are seized under sub -section ( 2) and no notice in respect thereof is given within 
six months of the seizure of the goods, the goods shall be returned to the person from whose possession 
they were seized:  
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
proper officer for a further period not exceeding six months.  
(8) The Government may, having regard to the perishable or hazardous nature of any goods, 
depreciation in the value of the goods with the passage of time, constraints of storage space for the goods 
or any other relevant considerations, by notification, specify the goods or class of goods which shall, as 
soon as may be after its seizure under sub -section ( 2), be disposed of by the proper officer in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(9) Where any goods, being goods specified under sub -section ( 8), have been seized by a proper 
officer, or any officer authorised by him under sub -section ( 2), he shall prepare an inventory of such 
goods in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(10) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to search and seizure, 
shall, so far as may be, apply to search and seizure under this section subject to the modification that                 
sub-section ( 5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if for the word “Magistrate”, wherever it 
occurs, the word “Commissioner” were substituted.  
(11) Where the proper officer has reasons to believe that any person has evaded or is attempting to evade 
the payment of any tax, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize the accounts, registers or 
documents of such person produced before him and shall grant a receipt for the same, and shall retain the same 
for so long as may be necessary in connection with any proceedings under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder for prosecution.  
(12) The Commissioner or an officer authorised by him may cause purchase of any goods or services 
or both by any person authorised by him from the business premises of any taxable person, to check the 
issue of tax invoices or bills of supply by such taxable person, and on return of goods so purchased by 
such officer, such taxable person or any person in charge of the business premises shall refund the amount 
so paid towards the goods after cancelling any tax invoice or bill of supply issued earlier.

68. Inspection of goods in movement .––(1) The Government may require the person in charge of a 
conveyance carrying any consignment of goods of value exceeding such amount as may be specified to 
carry with him such documents and such devices as may be prescribed.  
(2) The details of documents required to be carried under sub -section ( 1) shall be validated in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
65 
 (3) Where any conveyance referred to in sub -section ( 1) is intercepted by the proper officer at any 
place, he may require the person in charge of the said conveyance to produce the documents prescribed 
under the said sub -section and devices for verification, and the said person shall be liable to produce the 
documents and devices and also allow the inspection of goods.

69. Power to arrest .––(1) Where the Commissioner has reasons to believe that a person has 
committed any offence specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 132 which is punishable under clause ( i) or ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), or sub -section ( 2) of the said 
section, he may, by order, authorise any officer of central tax to arrest such person.  
(2) Where a person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) for an offence specified under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 132, the officer authorised to arrest the person shall inform such person of the grounds of arrest and 
produce him before a Magistrate within twenty -four hours.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), –– 
(a) where a person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) for any offence specified under                         
sub-section ( 4) of section 132, he shall be admitted to bail or in default of bail, forwarded to the 
custody of the Magistrate;  
(b) in the case of a non -cognizable and bailable offence, the Deputy Commissioner or the Assistant 
Commissioner shall, for the purpose of releasing an arrested person on bail or otherwise, have the same 
powers and be subject to the same provisions as an officer -in-charge of a police station.

70. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents. ––(1) The proper officer 
under this Act shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary either to 
give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any inquiry in the same manner, as provided 
in the case of a civil court under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
1[(1A) All persons summoned under sub -section ( 1) shall be bound to attend, either in person or by an 
authorised representative, as such officer may direct, and the person so appearing shall state the truth 
during examination or make statements or produce such documents and other things as may be required.]  
(2) Every such inquiry referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a “judicial proceedings” 
within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

71. Access to business premises .––(1) Any officer under this Act, authorised by the proper officer not 
below the rank of Joint Commissioner, shall have access to any place of business of a registered person to 
inspect books of account, documents, computers, computer programs, computer software whether installed in 
a computer or otherwise and such other things as he may require and which may be available at such place, 
for the purposes of carrying out any audit, scrutiny, verification and checks as may be necessary to safeguard 
the interest of revenue.  
(2) Every person in charge of place referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, on demand, make available to 
the officer authorised under sub -section ( 1) or the audit party deputed by the proper officer or a cost 
accountant or chartered accountant nominated under section 66 — 
(i) such records as prepared or maintained by the registered person and declared to the proper 
officer in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(ii) trial balance or its equivalent;  
(iii) statements of annual financial accounts, duly audited, wherever required;  
(iv) cost audit report, if any, under section 148 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013);  
(v) the income -tax audit report, if any, under section 44AB of the Income -tax Act, 1961              
(43 of 1961); and