168. Power to issue instructions or directions. —(1) The Board may, if it considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do for the purpose of uniformity in the implementation of this Act, issue such orders, 
instructions or directions to the central tax officers as it may deem fit, and thereupon all such officers and 
all other persons employed in the implementation of this Act shall observe and follow such orders, 
instructions or directions.  
(2) The Commissioner specified in clause ( 91) of section 2, sub -section ( 3) of section 5, clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 9) of section 25, sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 35, sub -section ( 1) of section 37, 
1*** sub-section ( 6) of section 39, 2[  3[section 44] , sub -sections (4) and (5) of section 52,]  4[sub-section 
(1) of section 143, except the second proviso thereof ], 5*** clause ( l) of sub-section ( 3) of section 158 
and section 167 shall mean a Commissioner or Joint Secretary posted in the Board and such 
Commissioner or Joint Secretary shall exercise the powers specified in the said sections with the 
approval of the Board.  
6[168A. Power of Government to extend time limit in special circumstances. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, by notification, extend the time limit specified in, or prescribed or notified under, this Act in 
respect of actions which cannot be completed of complied with due to force majeure.  
(2) The power to issue notification under sub -section ( 1) shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect to such notification from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “force majeure ” means a case of war, 
epidemic, flood, drought, fire, cyclone, earthquake or any other calamity caused by nature or otherwise 
affecting the implementation of any of the provisions of this Act.]

169. Service of notice in certain circumstances .—(1) Any decision, order, summons, notice or other 
communication under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be served by any one of the following 
methods, namely: — 
(a) by giving or tendering it directly or by a messenger including a courier to the addressee or the 
taxable person or to his manager or authorised representative or an advocate or a tax practitioner 
holding authority to appear in the proceedings on behalf of the taxable person or to a person regularly 
employed by him in connection with the business, or to any adult member of family residing with the 
taxable person; or  
(b) by registered post or speed post or courier with acknowledgment due, to the person for whom 
it is intended or his authorised representative, if any, at his last known place of business or residence; 
or

1. The words “sub-section (2) of section 38,” omitted by Act 6 of 2022, s. 114 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 111 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 121, for the words “sub -section ( 1) of section 44” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

4. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 129, for words “sub -section ( 5) of section 66, sub -section ( 1) of section 143” (w.e.f. 30 -6-2020).

5. The words “ sub-section ( 1) of section 151,” omitted by Act 13 of 2021 , s. 121,  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

6. Ins. by Act 38 of 2020, s. 7 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2020).  
120 
 (c) by sending a communication to his e-mail address provided at the time of registration or as 
amended from time to time; or  
(d) by making it available on the common portal; or  
(e) by publication in a newspaper circulating in the locality in which the taxable person or the 
person to whom it is issued is last known to have resided, carried on business or personally worked 
for gain; or  
(f) if none of the modes aforesaid is practicable, by affixing it in some conspicuous place at his last 
known place of business or residence and if such mode is not practicable for any reason, then by affixing a 
copy thereof on the notice board of the office of the concerned officer or authority who or which passed 
such decision or order or issued such summons or notice.  
(2) Every decision, order, summons, notice or any communication shall be deemed to have been 
served on the date on which it is tendered or published or a copy thereof is affixed in the manner provided 
in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) When such decision, order, summons, notice or any communication is sent by registered post or 
speed post, it shall be deemed to have been received by the addressee at the expiry of the period normally 
taken by such post in transit unless the contrary is proved.

170. Rounding off of tax, etc. —The amount of tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum payable, 
and the amount of refund or any other sum due, under the provisions of this Act shall be rounded off to 
the nearest rupee and, for this purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rupee consisting of paise, 
then, if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to one rupee and if such part is less than fifty 
paise it shall be ignored.

171. Anti -profiteering measure. —(1) Any reduction in rate of tax on any supply of goods or 
services or the benefit of input tax credit shall be passed on to the recipient by way of commensurate 
reduction in prices.  
(2) The Central Government may, on recommendations of the Council, by notification, constitute an 
Authority, or empower an existing Authority constituted under any law for the time being in force, to 
examine whether input tax credits availed by any registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have 
actually resulted in a commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or services or both supplied by him.  
1[Provided that the Government may by notification, on the recommendations of the Council, specify 
the date from which the said Authority shall not accept any request for examination as to whether input 
tax credits availed by any registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have actually resulted in a 
commensurate reduction in the price of the goods or services or both supplied by him.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “request for examination ” shall mean the written 
application filed by an applicant requesting for examination as to whether input tax credits availed by any 
registered person or the reduction in the tax rate have actually resulted in a commensurate reduction in the 
price of the goods or services or both supplied by him.]  
(3) The Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall exercise such powers and discharge such 
functions as may be prescribed.  
2[(3A) Where the Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2), after holding examination as required under 
the said sub -section comes to the conclusion that any registered person has profiteered under                           
sub-section  (1), such person shall be liable to pay penalty equivalent to ten per cent. of the amount so 
profiteered:  
Provided that no penalty shall be leviable if the profiteered amount is deposited within thirty days of 
the date of passing of the order by the Authority.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 14 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 112 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
121 
 Explanation.  1[1]—For the purposes of this section, the expression “profiteered ” shall mean the 
amount determined on account of not passing the benefit of reduction in rate of tax on supply of goods or 
services or both or the benefit of input tax credit to the recipient by way of commensurate reduction in the 
price of the goods or services or both.]  
1[Explanation  2.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “Authority ” shall include the 
“Appellate Tribunal ”.]

172. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provisions of this 
Act, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by a general or a special order 
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder, as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing 
the said difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of 2[five years ] from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.

173.  Amendment of Act 32 of 1994. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, Chapter V of the 
Finance Act, 1994 shall be omitted.

174. Repeal and saving. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, on and from the date of 
commencement of this Act, the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) (except as respects goods included in 
entry 84 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution), the Medicinal and Toilet 
Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 (16 of 1955), the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special 
Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957), the Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles)         
Act, 1978 (40 of 1978), and the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) (hereafter referred to as the 
repealed Acts) are hereby repealed.  
(2) The repeal of the said Acts and the amendment of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994) (hereafter 
referred to as “such amendment” or “amended Act”, as the case may be) to the extent mentioned in the 
sub-section ( 1) or section 173 shall not — 
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time of such amendment or repeal; or  
(b) affect the previous operation of the amended Act or repealed Acts and orders or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder; or  
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the 
amended Act or repealed Acts or orders under such repealed or amended Acts:  
Provided that any tax exemption granted as an incentive against investment through a notification 
shall not continue as privilege if the said notification is rescinded on or after the appointed day; or  
(d) affect any duty, tax, surcharge, fine, penalty, interest as are due or may become due or any 
forfeiture or punishment incurred or inflicted in respect of any offence or violation committed against 
the provisions of the amended Act or repealed Acts; or  
(e) affect any investigation, inquiry, verification (including scrutiny and audit), assessment proceedings, 
adjudication and any other legal proceedings or recovery of arrears or remedy in respect of any such duty, 
tax, surcharge, penalty, fine, interest, right, privilege, obligation, liability, forfeiture or punishment, as 
aforesaid, and any such investigation, inquiry, verification (including scrutiny and audit), assessment 
proceedings, adjudication and other legal proceedings or recovery of arrears or remedy may be instituted,

1. Renumbered and ins by Act 15 of 2024, s. 14 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 130, for “three years” (w.e.f. 30-6-2020).  
122 
 continued or enforced, and any such tax, surcharge, penalty, fine, interest, forfeiture or punishment may be 
levied or imposed as if these Acts had not been so amended or repealed;  
(f) affect any proceedings including that relating to an appeal, review or reference, instituted before on, 
or after the appointed day under the said amended Act or repealed Acts and such proceedings shall be 
continued under the said amended Act or repealed Acts as if this Act had not come into force and the said 
Acts had not been amended or repealed.  
(3) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with 
regard to the effect of repeal.  
123 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See section 7]  
ACTIVITIES TO BE TREATED AS SUPPLY EVEN IF MADE WITHOUT CONSIDERATION

1. Permanent transfer or disposal of business assets where input tax credit has been availed on such 
assets.

2. Supply of goods or services or both between related persons or between distinct persons as 
specified in section 25, when made in the course or furtherance of business:  
Provided that gifts not exceeding fifty thousand rupees in value in a financial year by an employer to an 
employee shall not be treated as supply of goods or services or both.

3. Supply of goods — 
(a) by a principal to his agent where the agent undertakes to supply such goods on behalf of the 
principal; or  
(b) by an agent to his principal where the agent undertakes to receive such goods on behalf of the 
principal.

4. Import of services by a 1[person ] from a related person or from any of his other establishments 
outside India, in the course or furtherance of business.

1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 30 for “taxable person” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
124 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See section 7]  
ACTIVITIES 1[OR TRANSACTIONS] TO BE TREATED AS SUPPLY OF GOODS OR SUPPLY OF 
SERVICES

1. Transfer  
(a) any transfer of the title in goods is a supply of goods;  
(b) any transfer of right in goods or of undivided share in goods without the transfer of title 
thereof, is a supply of services;  
(c) any transfer of title in goods under an agreement which stipulates that property in goods shall 
pass at a future date upon payment of full consideration as agreed, is a supply of goods.

2. Land and Building  
(a) any lease, tenancy, easement, licence to occupy land is a supply of services;  
(b) any lease or letting out of the building including a commercial, industrial or residential 
complex for business or commerce, either wholly or partly, is a supply of services.

3. Treatment or process  
           Any treatment or process which is applied to another person's goods is a supply of services.

4. Transfer of business assets  
(a) where goods forming part of the assets of a business are transferred or disposed of by or under 
the directions of the person carrying on the business so as no longer to form part of those assets, 2***, 
such transfer or disposal is a supply of goods by the person;  
(b) where, by or under the direction of a person carrying on a business, goods held or used for the 
purposes of the business are put to any private use or are used, or made available to any person for use, 
for any purpose other than a purpose of the business, 2***, the usage or making available of such 
goods is a supply of services;  
(c) where any person ceases to be a taxable person, any goods forming part of the assets of any 
business carried on by him shall be deemed to be supplied by him in the course or furtherance of his 
business immediately before he ceases to be a taxable person, unless — 
(i) the business is transferred as a going concern to another person; or  
(ii) the business is carried on by a personal representative who is deemed to be a taxable person.

5. Supply of services  
The following shall be treated as supply of services, namely: — 
(a) renting of immovable property;  
(b) construction of a complex, building, civil structure or a part thereof, including a complex or 
building intended for sale to a buyer, wholly or partly, except where the entire consideration has been

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

2. The words “whether or not for a consideration” omitted by Act 12 of 2020, s. 131 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  
125 
 received after issuance of completion certificate, where required, by the competent authority or after 
its first occupation, whichever is earlier.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause — 
(1) the expression “competent authority” means the Government or any authority authorised to 
issue completion certificate under any law for the time being in force and in case of non -requirement 
of such certificate from such authority, from any of the following, namely: — 
(i) an architect registered with the Council of Architecture constituted under the Architects 
Act, 1972 (20 of 1972); or  
(ii) a chartered engineer registered with the Institution of Engineers (India); or  
(iii) a licensed surveyor of the respective local body of the city or town or village or 
development or planning authority;  
(2) the expression “construction” includes additions, alterations, replacements or remodelling of 
any existing civil structure;  
 (c) temporary transfer or permitting the use or enjoyment of any intellectual property right;  
 (d) development, design, programming, customisation, adaptation, upgradation, enhancement, 
implementation of information technology software;  
 (e) agreeing to the obligation to refrain from an act, or to tolerate an act or a situation, or to do an 
act; and  
 (f) transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) 
for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration.

6. Composite supply  
The following composite supplies shall be treated as a supply of services, namely: — 
(a) works contract as defined in clause ( 119) of section 2; and  
(b) supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being 
food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (other than alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption), where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable 
consideration.  
1*     *   *   *   *

1. Paragraph 7 omitted by Act 13 of 2021, s. 122 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).  
126 
 SCHEDULE III  
[See section 7]  
ACTIVITIES OR TRANSACTIONS WHICH SHALL BE TREATED NEITHER AS A SUPPLY OF GOODS 
NOR A SUPPLY OF SERVICES

1. Services by an employee to the employer in the course of or in relation to his employment.

2. Services by any court or Tribunal established under any law for the time being in force.

3. (a) the functions performed by the Members of Parliament, Members of State Legislature, 
Members of Panchayats, Members of Municipalities and Members of other local authorities;  
(b) the duties performed by any person who holds any post in pursuance of the provisions of the 
Constitution in that capacity; or  
(c) the duties performed by any person as a Chairperson or a Member or a Director in a body 
established by the Central Government or a State Government or local authority and who is not 
deemed as an employee before the commencement of this clause.

4. Services of funeral, burial, crematorium or mortuary including transportation of the deceased.

5. Sale of land and, subject to clause ( b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule II, sale of building.

6. Actionable claims, other than 1[specified actionable claims ]. 
2[7. Supply of goods from a place in the non -taxable territory to another place in the non-taxable 
territory without such goods entering into India.

8. (a) Supply of warehoused goods to any person before clearance for home consumption;  
3[(aa) Supply of goods warehoused in a Special Economic Zone or in a Free Trade Warehousing 
Zone to any person before clearance for exports or to the Domestic Tariff Area;]  
(b) Supply of goods by the consignee to any other person, by endorsement of documents of title to 
the goods, after the goods have been dispatched from the port of origin located outside India but before 
clearance for home consumption.]  
4[9. Activity of apportionment of co -insurance premium by the lead insurer to the co -insurer for the 
insurance services jointly supplied by the lead insurer and the co -insurer to the insured in co-insurance 
agreements, subject to the condition that the lead insurer pays the central tax, the State tax, the Union 
territory tax and the integrated tax on the entire amount of premium paid by the insured.

10. Services by insurer to the reinsurer for which ceding commission or the reinsurance commission 
is deducted from reinsurance premium paid by the insurer to the reinsurer, subject to the condition that the 
central tax, the State tax, the Union territory tax and the integrated tax is paid by the reinsurer on the gross 
reinsurance premium payable by the insurer to the reinsurer, inclusive of the said ceding commission or 
the reinsurance commission.]  
Explanation  5[1.]—For the purposes of paragraph 2, the term “court” includes District Court, High 
Court and Supreme Court.  
5[Explanation 2 .––For the purposes of 3[clause ( a) of] paragraph 8, the expression “warehoused 
goods” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) .]

1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2023, s. 4, for “ lottery, betting and gambling” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 32 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

3. Ins. by Act 7 of 2025, s. 133 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

4. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 14 9 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

5. Numbered and- ins by Act 31 of 2018, s. 32 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
127 
 1[Explanation  3.—For the purposes of clause ( aa) of paragraph 8, the expressions “Special 
Economic Zone ”, “Free Trade Warehousing Zone ” and “Domestic Tariff Area ” shall have the same 
meanings respectively as assigned to them in section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 
2005).]

1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2025, s. 133 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).