167. Delegation of powers.

168. Power to issue instructions or directions.  
168A. Power of Government to extend time limit in special circumstances.

169. Service of notice in certain circumstances.

170. Rounding off of tax, etc.

171. Anti-profiteering measure.

172. Removal of difficulties.

173. Amendment of Act 32 of 1994.

174. Repeal and saving.  
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
SCHEDULE III.  
10 
 THE CENTRAL GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017  
ACT NO. 12 OF 2017  
[12th April, 2017.]  
An Act to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on intra -State supply of goods or services or 
both by the Central Government and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.

2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, –– 
(1) “actionable claim” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882);  
(2) “address of delivery” means the address of the recipient of goods or services or both indicated 
on the tax invoice issued by a registered person for delivery of such goods or services or both;  
(3) “address on record” means the address of the recipient as available in the records of the 
supplier;  
(4) “adjudicating authority” means any authority, appointed or authorised to pass any order or decision 
under this Act, but does not include the 3[Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs], the Revisional 
Authority, the Authority for Advance Ruling, the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling,  4[the National 
Appellate  Authority for Advance Ruling ,] 5[the Appellate Authority, the Appellate Tribunal and the 
Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 171];  
(5) “agent” means a person, including a factor, broker, commission agent, arhatia , del credere 
agent, an auctioneer or any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the 
business of supply or receipt of goods or services or both on behalf of another;  
(6) “aggregate turnover” means the aggregate value of all taxable supplies (excluding the value of 
inward supplies on which tax is payable by a person on reverse charge basis), exempt supplies, exports of 
goods or services or both and inter -State supplies of persons having the same Permanent Account Number, to 
be computed on all India basis but excludes central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated tax and cess;

1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 26 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2017).

2. 22nd June, 2017 for sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 139, 146 and 164, vide Notification No. G.S.R. 
605 ( E), dated the 19 June, 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
   1st July, 2017 for sections 6 to 9, 11 to 21, 31 to 41, 42 except the proviso to sub -section ( 9) of section 42, 43 except the 
proviso to sub -section ( 9) of sections 43, 44 to 50, 53 to 138, 140 to 145, 147 to 163, 165 to 174 vide Notification No. G.S.R. 
658 ( E), dated the 28th June, 2017, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i).

3. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018 , s. 2, for “Central Board of Excise and Customs” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

4. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 92 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

5. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2, for “the Appellate Authority and the Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
11 
 (7) “agriculturist” means an individual or a Hindu Undivided Family who undertakes cultivation 
of land — 
(a) by own labour, or  
(b) by the labour of family, or  
(c) by servants on wages payable in cash or kind or by hired labour under personal supervision 
or the personal supervision of any member of the family;  
(8) “Appellate Authority” means an authority appointed or authorised to hear appeals as referred 
to in section 107;  
(9) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
section 109;  
(10) “appointed day” means the date on which the provisions of this Act shall come into force;  
(11) “assessment” means determination of tax liability under this Act and includes                                 
self-assessment, re -assessment, provisional assessment, summary assessment and best judgment 
assessment;  
(12) “associated enterprises” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 92A of the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(13) “audit” means the examination of records, returns and other documents maintained or 
furnished by the registered person under this Act or the rules made thereunder or under any other law 
for the time being in force to verify the correctness of turnover declared, taxes paid, refund claimed and 
input tax credit availed, and to assess his compliance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder;  
(14) “authorised bank” shall mean a bank or a branch of a bank authorised by the Government to 
collect the tax or any other amount payable under this Act;  
(15) “authorised representative” means the representative as referred to in section 116;  
(16) “Board” means the 1[Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs]  constituted under the 
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963);  
(17) “business” includes –– 
(a) any trade, commerce, manufacture, profession, vocation, adventure, wager or any other 
similar activity, whether or not it is for a pecuniary benefit;  
(b) any activity or transaction in connection with or incidental or ancillary to sub -clause ( a); 
(c) any activity or transaction in the nature of sub -clause ( a), whether or not there is volume, 
frequency, continuity or regularity of such transaction;  
(d) supply or acquisition of goods including capital goods and services in connection with 
commencement or closure of business;  
(e) provision by a club, association, society, or any such body (for a subscription or any other 
consideration) of the facilities or benefits to its members;  
(f) admission, for a consideration, of persons to any premises;  
(g) services supplied by a person as the holder of an office which has been accepted by him in the 
course or furtherance of his trade, profession or vocation;  
2[(h) activities of a race club including by way of totalisator or a license to book maker or 
activities of a licensed book maker in such club; and]

1. Subs. by Act 1 3 of 2018, s. 2 21, for “Central Board of Excise and Customs” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
12 
 (i) any activity or transaction undertaken by the Central Government, a State Government or 
any local authority in which they are engaged as public authorities;  
1*             *                  *                *                  * 
(19) “capital goods” means goods, the value of which is capitalised  in the books of account of the 
person claiming the input tax credit and which are used or intended to be used in the course or 
furtherance of business;  
(20) “casual taxable person” means a person who occasionally undertakes transactions involving 
supply of goods or services or both in the course or furtherance of business, whether as principal, agent 
or in any other capacity, in a State or a Union territory where he has no fixed place of business;  
(21) “central tax” means the central goods and services tax levied under section 9;  
(22) “cess” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Goods and Services Tax 
(Compensation to States) Act;  
(23) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949);  
(24) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of central tax and includes the Principal 
Commissioner of central tax appointed under section 3 and the Commissioner of integrated tax 
appointed under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(25) “Commissioner in the Board” means the Commissioner referred to in section 168;  
(26) “common portal” means the common goods and services tax electronic portal referred to in 
section 146;  
(27) “common working days” in respect of a State or Union territory shall mean such days in 
succession which are not declared as gazetted holidays by the Central Government or the concerned 
State or Union territory Government;  
(28) “company secretary” means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980);  
(29) “competent authority” means such authority as may be notified by the Government;  
(30) “composite supply” means a supply made by a taxable person to a recipient consisting of two 
or more taxable supplies of goods or services or both, or any combination thereof, which are naturally 
bundled and supplied in conjunction with each other in the ordinary course of business, one of which 
is a principal supply;  
Illustration .— Where goods are packed and transported with insurance, the supply of goods, 
packing materials, transport and insurance is a composite supply and supply of goods is a principal 
supply;  
(31) “consideration” in relation to the supply of goods or services or both includes –– 
(a) any payment made or to be made, whether in money or otherwise, in respect of, in 
response to, or for the inducement of, the supply of goods or services or both, whether by the 
recipient or by any other person but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central 
Government or a State Government;  
(b) the monetary value of any act or forbearance, in respect of, in response to, or for the 
inducement of, the supply of goods or services or both, whether by the recipient or by any other 
person but shall not include any subsidy given by the Central Government or a State Government:

1. Clause ( 18) omitted by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).   
13 
 Provided that a deposit given in respect of the supply of goods or services or both shall not be 
considered as payment made for such supply unless the supplier applies such deposit as consideration 
for the said supply;  
(32) “continuous supply of goods” means a supply of goods which is provided, or agreed to be 
provided, continuously or on recurrent basis, under a contract, whether or not by means of a wire, 
cable, pipeline or other conduit, and for which the supplier invoices the recipient on a regular or 
periodic basis and includes supply of such goods as the Government may, subject to such conditions, 
as it may, by notification, specify;  
(33) “continuous supply of services” means a supply of services which is provided, or agreed to 
be provided, continuously or on recurrent basis, under a contract, for a period exceeding three months 
with periodic payment obligations and includes supply of such services as the Government may, 
subject to such conditions, as it may, by notification, specify;  
(34) “conveyance” includes a vessel, an aircraft and a vehicle;  
(35) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in 1[clause ( b)] of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959);  
(36) “Council” means the Goods and Services Tax Council established under article 279A of the 
Constitution;  
(37) “credit note” means a document issued by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 34;  
(38) “debit note” means a document issued by a registered person under sub -section ( 3) of                    
section 34;  
(39) “deemed exports” means such supplies of goods as may be notified under section 147;  
(40) “designated authority” means such authority as may be notified by the Board;  
(41) “document” includes written or printed record of any sort and electronic record as defined in 
clause ( t) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);  
(42) “drawback” in relation to any goods manufactured in India and exported, means the rebate of 
duty, tax or cess  chargeable on any imported inputs or on any domestic inputs or input services used 
in the manufacture of such goods;  
(43) “electronic cash ledger” means the electronic cash ledger referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 49;  
(44) “electronic commerce” means the supply of goods or services or both, including digital 
products over digital or electronic network;  
(45) “electronic commerce operator” means any person who owns, operates or manages digital or 
electronic facility or platform for electronic commerce;  
(46) “electronic credit ledger” means the electronic credit ledger referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 49;  
(47) “exempt supply” means supply of any goods or services or both which attracts nil rate of tax 
or which may be wholly exempt from tax under section 11, or under section 6 of the Integrated Goods 
and Services Tax Act, and includes non -taxable supply;  
(48) “existing law” means any law, notification, order, rule or regulation relating to levy and 
collection of duty or tax on goods or services or both passed or made before the commencement of 
this Act by Parliament or any Authority or person having the power to make such law, notification, 
order, rule or regulation;

1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2, for “clause ( c)” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
14 
 (49) “family” means, –– 
(i) the spouse and children of the person , and 
(ii) the parents, grand -parents, brothers and sisters of the person if they are wholly or mainly 
dependent on the said person;  
(50) “fixed establishment” means a place (other than the registered place of business) which is 
characterised by a sufficient degree of permanence and suitable structure in terms of human and 
technical resources to supply services, or to receive and use services for its own needs;  
(51) “Fund” means the Consumer Welfare Fund established under section 57;  
(52) “goods” means every kind of movable property other than money and securities but includes 
actionable claim, growing crops, grass and things attached to or forming part of the land which are 
agreed to be severed before supply or under a contract of supply;  
(53) “Government” means the Central Government;  
(54) “Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act” means the Goods and Services Tax 
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 (15 of 2017);  
(55) “goods and services tax practitioner” means any person who has been approved under 
section 48 to act as such practitioner;  
(56) “India” means the territory of India as referred to in article 1 of the Constitution, its territorial 
waters, seabed and sub -soil underlying such waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone or any 
other maritime zone as referred to in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone 
and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976), and the air space above its territory and territorial 
waters;  
(57) “Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Integrated Goods and Services Tax        
Act, 2017 (13 of 2017);  
(58) “integrated tax” means the integrated goods and services tax levied under the Integrated 
Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(59) “input” means any goods other than capital goods used or intended to be used by a supplier 
in the course or furtherance of business;  
(60) “input service” means any service used or intended to be used by a supplier in the course or 
furtherance of business;  
1[(61) “Input Service Distributor ” means an office of the supplier of goods or services or both 
which receives tax invoices towards the receipt of input services, including invoices in respect of 
services liable to tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 9  2[of this Act or under                  
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (13 
of 2017)] , for or on behalf of distinct persons referred to in section 25, and liable to distribute the 
input tax credit in respect of such invoices in the manner provided in section 20;]   
(62) “input tax” in relation to a registered person, means the central tax, State tax, integrated tax 
or Union territory tax charged on any supply of goods or services or both made to him and includes — 
(a) the integrated goods and services tax charged on import of goods;  
(b) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9;  
(c) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 5 of the 
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(d) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9 of the 
respective State Goods and Services Tax Act; or

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2024, s. 11, for “clause ( 61)” (w.e.f. 01 -04-2025).

2. Ins. by Act 7 of 202 5, s. 121 (w.e.f. 01 -04-2025).  
15 
 (e) the tax payable under the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 7 of the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act,  
but does not include the tax paid under the composition levy;  
(63) “input tax credit” means the credit of input tax;  
(64) “intra -State supply of goods” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 8 of 
the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(65) “intra -State supply of services” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 8 of 
the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(66) “invoice” or “tax invoice” means the tax invoice referred to in section 31;  
(67) “inward supply” in relation to a person, shall mean receipt of goods or services or both 
whether by purchase, acquisition or any other means with or without consideration;  
(68) “job work” means any treatment or process undertaken by a person on goods belonging to 
another registered person and the expression “job worker” shall be construed accordingly;  
(69) “local authority” means –– 
(a) a “Panchayat” as defined in clause ( d) of article 243 of the Constitution;  
(b) a “Municipality” as defined in clause ( e) of article 243P of the Constitution;  
(c) a Municipal Committee, a Zilla Parishad, a District Board, and any other authority legally 
entitled to, or entrusted by the Central Government or any State Government with the control or 
management of a municipal or local fund;  
(d) a Cantonment Board as defined in section 3 of the Cantonments Act, 2006 (41 of 2006);  
(e) a Regional Council or a District Council constituted under the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution;  
(f) a Development Board constituted under article 371 1[and article 371J] of the Constitution; 
or 
(g) a Regional Council constituted under article 371A of the Constitution;  
(70) “location of the recipient of services” means, — 
(a) where a supply is received at a place of business for which the registration has been 
obtained, the location of such place of business;  
(b) where a supply is received at a place other than the place of business for which 
registration has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed 
establishment;  
(c) where a supply is received at more than one establishment, whether the place of 
business or fixed establishment, the location of the establishment most directly concerned 
with the receipt of the supply; and  
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of residence of the recipient;  
(71) “location of the supplier of services” means, — 
(a) where a supply is made from a place of business for which the registration has been 
obtained, the location of such place of business;  
(b) where a supply is made from a place other than the place of business for which 
registration has been obtained (a fixed establishment elsewhere), the location of such fixed 
establishment;

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
16 
 (c) where a supply is made from more than one establishment, whether the place of 
business or fixed establishment, the location of the establishment most directly concerned 
with the provisions of the supply; and  
(d) in absence of such places, the location of the usual place of residence of the supplier;  
(72) “manufacture” means processing of raw material or inputs in any manner that results in 
emergence of a new product having a distinct name, character and use and the term “manufacturer” 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(73) “market value” shall mean the full amount which a recipient of a supply is required to pay in 
order to obtain the goods or services or both of like kind and quality at or about the same time and at the 
same commercial level where the recipient and the supplier are not related;  
(74) “mixed supply” means two or more individual supplies of goods or services, or any combination 
thereof, made in conjunction with each other by a taxable person for a single price where such supply 
does not constitute a composite supply.  
Illustration .— A supply of a package consisting of canned foods, sweets, chocolates, cakes, dry 
fruits, aerated drinks and fruit juices when supplied for a single price is a mixed supply. Each of these 
items can be supplied separately and is not dependent on any other. It shall not be a mixed supply if 
these items are supplied separately ; 
(75) “money” means the Indian legal tender or any foreign currency, cheque, promissory note, bill of 
exchange, letter of credit, draft, pay order, traveller cheque, money order, postal or electronic remittance or 
any other instrument recognised by the Reserve Bank of India when used as a consideration to settle an 
obligation or exchange with Indian legal tender of another denomination but shall not include any 
currency that is held for its numismatic value;  
(76) “motor vehicle” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 28) of section 2 of 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988);  
(77) “non -resident taxable person” means any person who occasionally undertakes transactions 
involving supply of goods or services or both, whether as principal or agent or in any other capacity, 
but who has no fixed place of business or residence in India;  
(78) “non -taxable supply” means a supply of goods or services or both which is not leviable to tax 
under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(79) “non -taxable territory” means the territory which is outside the taxable territory;  
(80) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expressions 
“notify” and “notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
1[(80A) “online gaming” means offering of a game on the internet or an electronic network and 
includes online money gaming;  
(80B) “online money gaming” means online gaming in which players pay or deposit money or 
money's worth, including virtual digital assets, in the expectation of winning money or money's 
worth, including virtual digital assets, in any event including game, scheme, competition or any other 
activity or process, whether or not its outcome or performance is based on skill, chance or both and 
whether the same is permissible or otherwise under any other law for the time being in force;]  
(81) “other territory” includes territories other than those comprising in a State and those referred 
to in sub -clauses ( a) to ( e) of clause ( 114); 
(82) “output tax” in relation to a taxable person, means the tax chargeable under this Act on 
taxable supply of goods or services or both made by him or by his agent but excludes tax payable by 
him on reverse charge basis;

1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2023, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
17 
 (83) “outward supply” in relation to a taxable person, means supply of goods or services or both, 
whether by sale, transfer, barter, exchange, licence, rental, lease or disposal or any other mode, made 
or agreed to be made by such person in the course or furtherance of business;  
(84) “person” includes — 
(a) an individual;  
(b) a Hindu Undivided Family;  
(c) a company;  
(d) a firm;  
(e) a Limited Liability Partnership;  
(f) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, in India or 
outside India;  
(g) any corporation established by or under any Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act or a 
Government company as defined in clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013             
(18 of 2013);  
(h) any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside India;  
(i) a co -operative society registered under any law relating to co -operative societies;  
(j) a local authority;  
(k) Central Government or a State Government;  
(l) society as defined under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860);  
(m) trust; and  
(n) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the above;  
(85) “place of business” includes –– 
(a) a place from where the business is ordinarily carried on, and includes a warehouse, a 
godown or any other place where a taxable person stores his goods, supplies or receives goods or 
services or both; or  
(b) a place where a taxable person maintains his books of account; or  
(c) a place where a taxable person is engaged in business through an agent, by whatever name 
called;  
(86) “place of supply” means the place of supply as referred to in Chapter V of the Integrated 
Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(87) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act on the recommendations of the 
Council;  
(88) “principal” means a person on whose behalf an agent carries on the business of supply or 
receipt of goods or services or both;  
(89) “principal place of business” means the place of business specified as the principal place of 
business in the certificate of registration;  
(90) “principal supply” means the supply of goods or services which constitutes the predominant 
element of a composite supply and to which any other supply forming part of that composite supply is 
ancillary;  
(91) “proper officer” in relation to any function to be performed under this Act, means the 
Commissioner or the officer of the central tax who is assigned that function by the Commissioner in 
the Board;  
(92) “quarter” shall mean a period comprising three consecutive calendar months, ending on the last 
day of March, June, September and December of a calendar year;  
18 
 (93) “recipient” of supply of goods or services or both, means — 
(a) where a consideration is payable for the supply of goods or services or both, the person 
who is liable to pay that consideration;  
(b) where no consideration is payable for the supply of goods, the person to whom the goods 
are delivered or made available, or to whom possession or use of the goods is given or made 
available; and  
(c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of a service, the person to whom the 
service is rendered,  
and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made shall be construed as a reference to the 
recipient of the supply and shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of the recipient in relation 
to the goods or services or both supplied;  
(94) “registered person” means a person who is registered under section 25 but does not include a 
person having a Unique Identity Number;  
(95) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board under this Act on the 
recommendations of the Council;  
(96) “removal” in relation to goods, means — 
(a) despatch  of the goods for delivery by the supplier thereof or by any other person acting on 
behalf of such supplier; or  
(b) collection of the goods by the recipient thereof or by any other person acting on behalf of 
such recipient;  
(97) “return” means any return prescribed or otherwise required to be furnished by or under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(98) “reverse charge” means the liability to pay tax by the recipient of supply of goods or services 
or both instead of the supplier of such goods or services or both under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) 
of section 9, or under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and 
Services Tax Act;  
(99) “Revisional Authority” means an authority appointed or authorised for revision of decision 
or orders as referred to in section 108;  
(100) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act;  
(101) “securities” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);  
(102) “services” means anything other than goods, money and securities but includes activities 
relating to the use of money or its conversion by cash or by any other mode, from one form, currency 
or denomination, to another form, currency or denomination for which a separate consideration is 
charged ; 
1[Explanation .––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the expression “services” 
includes facilitating or arranging transactions in securities;]  
2[(102A ) “specified actionable claim” means the actionable claim involved in or by way of — 
(i) betting;  
(ii) casinos;  
(iii) gambling;

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Ins. by Act 30 of 2023, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
19 
 (iv) horse racing;  
(v) lottery; or  
(vi) online money gaming;]  
(103) “State” includes a Union territory with Legislature;  
(104) “State tax” means the tax levied under any State Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(105) “supplier” in relation to any goods or services or both, shall mean the person supplying the 
said goods or services or both and shall include an agent acting as such on behalf of such supplier in 
relation to the goods or services or both supplied ; 
1[Provided that a person who organises or arranges, directly or indirectly, supply of specified 
actionable claims, including a person who owns, operates or manages digital or electronic platform 
for such supply, shall be deemed to be a supplier of such actionable claims, whether such actionable 
claims are supplied by him or through him and whether consideration in money or money's worth, 
including virtual digital assets, for supply of such actionable claims is paid or conveyed to him or 
through him or placed at his disposal in any manner, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to 
such supplier  of specified actionable claims, as if he is the supplier liable to pay the tax in relation to 
the supply of such actionable claims;]  
(106) “tax period” means the period for which the return is required to be furnished;  
(107) “taxable person” means a person who is registered or liable to be registered under               
section 22 or section 24;  
(108) “taxable supply” means a supply of goods or services or both which is leviable to tax under 
this Act;  
(109) “taxable territory” means the territory to which the provisions of this Act apply;  
(110) “telecommunication service” means service of any description (including electronic mail, 
voice mail, data services, audio text services, video text services, radio paging and cellular mobile 
telephone services) which is made available to users by means of any transmission or reception of 
signs, signals, writing, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature, by wire, radio, visual or other 
electromagnetic means;  
(111) “the State Goods and Services Tax Act” means the respective State Goods and Services 
Tax Act, 2017;  
(112) “turnover in State” or “turnover in Union territory” means the aggregate value of all taxable 
supplies (excluding the value of inward supplies on which tax is payable by a person on reverse charge 
basis) and exempt supplies made within a State or Union territory by a taxable person, exports of goods 
or services or both and inter -State supplies of goods or services or both made from the State or Union 
territory by the said taxable person but excludes central tax, State tax, Union territory tax, integrated tax 
and cess;  
(113) “usual place of residence” means –– 
(a) in case of an individual, the place where he ordinarily resides;  
(b) in other cases, the place where the person is incorporated or otherwise legally constituted;  
(114) “Union territory” means the territory of — 
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;  
(b) Lakshadweep;

1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2023, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
20 
 1[(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli  and Daman and Diu ; 
(d) Ladakh ;] 
(e) Chandigarh; 2*** 
3[(ea) Ladakh; and ;] 
(f) other territory.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Act, each of the territories specified in sub-clauses ( a)             
to (f) shall be considered to be a separate Union territory;  
(115) “Union territory tax” means the Union territory goods and services tax levied under the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act;  
(116) “Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act” means the Union Territory Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 2017 (14 of 2017 ); 
(117) “valid return” means a return furnished under sub -section ( 1) of section 39 on which       
self-assessed tax has been paid in full;  
4[(117A ) “virtual digital asset” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (47A) of 
Section 2 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);]   
(118) “voucher” means an instrument where there is an obligation to accept it as consideration or 
part consideration for a supply of goods or services or both and where the goods or services or both to 
be supplied or the identities of their potential suppliers are either indicated on the instrument itself or 
in related documentation, including the terms and conditions of use of such instrument;  
(119) “works contract” means a contract for building, construction, fabrication, completion, 
erection, installation, fitting out, improvement, modification, repair, maintenance, renovation, alteration 
or commissioning of any immovable property wherein transfer of property in goods (whether as goods 
or in some other form) is involved in the execution of such contract;  
(120) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Integrated Goods 
and Services Tax Act, the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act and the Goods and Services 
Tax (Compensation to States) Act shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in those Acts;  
5*   *   *   *                    * 
CHAPTER II  
ADMINISTRATION

3. Officers under this Act. ––The Government shall, by notification, appoint the following classes of 
officers for the purposes of this Act, namely: –– 
(a) Principal Chief Commissioners of Central Tax or Principal Directors General of Central Tax,  
(b) Chief Commissioners of Central Tax or Directors General of Central Tax,

1. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s.  118, for sub -clauses ( c) and ( d) (w.e.f. 30 -6-2020).

2. The Word “ and” omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S.O. 1123(E), dated (18 -3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central 
Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3774( E), dated (23 -10-2020).  
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912( E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.

3. Ins.  by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide Notification No. S.O. 1123( E) 
dated (18 -3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O. 3774( E), dated (23 -10-2020).

4. Ins. by Act 30 of 2023, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

5. Clause ( 121) omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide notification 
No. S.O. 1123( E), dated (18 -3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws)               
Order, 2020, notification No. S.O. 3774( E), dated (23 -10-2020).  
21 
 (c) Principal Commissioners of Central Tax or Principal Additional Directors General of Central 
Tax, 
(d) Commissioners of Central Tax or Additional Directors General of Central Tax, 
(e) Additional Commissioners of Central Tax or Additional Directors of Central Tax,  
(f) Joint Commissioners of Central Tax or Joint Directors of Central Tax,  
(g) Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax or Deputy Directors of Central Tax,  
(h) Assistant Commissioners of Central Tax or Assistant Directors of Central Tax, and  
(i) any other class of officers as it may deem fit:  
Provided that the officers appointed under the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) shall be deemed 
to be the officers appointed under the provisions of this Act.

4. Appointment of officers. –– (1) The Board may, in addition to the officers as may be notified by the 
Government under section 3, appoint such persons as it may think fit to be the officers under this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board may, by order, authorise any 
officer referred to in clauses ( a) to ( h) of section 3 to appoint officers of central tax below the rank of 
Assistant Commissioner of central tax for the administration of this Act.

5. Powers of officers .––(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Board may impose, an 
officer of central tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on him 
under this Act.  
(2) An officer of central tax may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed under 
this Act on any other officer of central tax who is subordinate to him.  
(3) The Commissioner may, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in this 
behalf by him, delegate his powers to any other officer who is subordinate to him.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an Appellate Authority shall not exercise the 
powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on any other officer of central tax.

6. Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in certain 
circumstances. ––(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the 
State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act are authorised to 
be the proper officers for the purposes of this Act, subject to such conditions as the Government shall, on 
the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify.   
(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification issued under sub -section ( 1),–– 
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an order under the 
State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as authorised 
by the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the 
case may be, under intimation to the jurisdictional officer of State tax or Union territory tax;  
(b) where a proper officer under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory 
Goods and Services Tax Act has initiated any proceedings on a subject matter, no proceedings shall 
be initiated by the proper officer under this Act on the same subject matter.  
(3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, wherever applicable, of any order passed 
by an officer appointed under this Act shall not lie before an officer appointed under the State Goods and 
Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act.  
 
 
22 
 CHAPTER III  
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAX

7. Scope of supply. ––(1) For the purposes of this Act, the expression “supply” includes –– 
(a) all forms of supply of goods or services or both such as sale, transfer, barter, exchange, 
licence, rental, lease or disposal made or agreed to be made for a consideration by a person in the 
course or furtherance of business;  
1[(aa) the activities or transactions, by a person, other than an individual, to its members or 
constituents or vice -versa, for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified that, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or any judgment, decree or order 
of any Court, tribunal or authority, the person and its members or constituents shall be deemed to 
be two separate persons and the supply of activities or transactions inter se shall be deemed to 
take place from one such person to another;]  
(b) import of services for a consideration whether or not in the course or furtherance of business; 
2[and]  
(c) the activities specified in Schedule I, made or agreed to be made without a consideration ; 3*** 
 4*                               *                        *                             *                         *  
 2[(1A) Where certain activities or transactions constitute a supply in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -section ( 1), they shall be treated either as supply of goods or supply of services as referred to in 
Schedule II.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),–– 
(a) activities or transactions specified in Schedule III; or  
(b) such activities or transactions undertaken by the Central Government, a State Government or 
any local authority in which they are engaged as public authorities, as may be notified by the 
Government on the recommendations of the Council,  
shall be treated neither as a supply of goods nor a supply of services.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of 5[sub-sections ( 1), (1A) and ( 2)], the Government may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, specify, by notification, the transactions that are to be treated as — 
(a) a supply of goods and not as a supply of services; or  
(b) a supply of services and not as a supply of goods.

8. Tax liability on composite and mixed supplies. ––The tax liability on a composite or a mixed 
supply shall be determined in the following manner, namely: — 
(a) a composite supply comprising two or more supplies, one of which is a principal supply, shall 
be treated as a supply of such principal supply; and  
(b) a mixed supply comprising two or more supplies shall be treated as a supply of that particular 
supply which attracts the highest rate of tax.

9. Levy and collection. ––(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), there shall be levied a tax 
called the central goods and services tax on all intra -State supplies of goods or services or both, except on 
the supply of alcoholic liquor for human consumption  6[and un -denatured extra neutral alcohol or 
rectified spirit used for manufacture of alcoholic liquor, for human consumption ], on the value determined 
under section 15 and at such rates, not exceeding twenty per cent., as may be notified by the Government

1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 108 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

3. The word “and” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

4. Cl . (d) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2)” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

6. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 114 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
23 
 on the recommendations of the Council and collected in such manner as may be prescribed and shall be 
paid by the taxable person.  
(2) The central tax on the supply of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly 
known as petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel shall be levied with effect from such date as may 
be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council.  
(3) The Government may,  on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify categories 
of supply of goods or services or both, the tax on which shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the 
recipient of such goods or services or both and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient 
as if he is the person liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such goods or services or both.  
1[(4) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify a class of 
registered persons who shall, in respect of supply of specified categories of goods or services or both 
received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge basis as the recipient of such supply 
of goods or services or both, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such recipient as if he is the 
person liable for paying the tax in relation to such supply of goods or services or both.]  
(5) The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify categories of 
services the tax on intra -State supplies of which shall be paid by the electronic commerce operator if such 
services are supplied through it, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to such electronic commerce 
operator as if he is the supplier liable for paying the tax in relation to the supply of such services:  
Provided that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the taxable 
territory, any person representing such electronic commerce operator for any purpose in the taxable territory 
shall be liable to pay tax:  
Provided further that where an electronic commerce operator does not have a physical presence in the 
taxable territory and also he does not have a representative in the said territory, such electronic commerce 
operator shall appoint a person in the taxable territory for the purpose of paying tax and such person shall 
be liable to pay tax.

10. Composition levy. ––(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act but 
subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9, a registered person, whose aggregate 
turnover in the preceding financial year did not exceed fifty lakh rupees, may opt to pay, 2[in lieu of the 
tax payable by him under sub -section ( 1) of section 9, an amount of tax calculated at such rate] as may be 
prescribed, but not exceeding, –– 
(a) one per cent. of the turnover in State or turnover in Union territory in case of a manufacturer,  
(b) two and a half per cent. of the turnover in State or turnover in Union territory in case of 
persons engaged in making supplies referred to in clause ( b) of paragraph 6 of Schedule II, and  
(c) half per cent. of the turnover in State or turnover in Union territory in case of other suppliers,  
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Government may, by notification, increase the said limit of fifty lakh rupees to such 
higher amount, not exceeding   3[one crore and fifty lakh rupees ], as ma y be recommended by the Council:  
4[Provided further that a person who opts to pay tax under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) may 
supply services (other than those referred to in clause ( b) of paragraph 6 of Schedule II), of value not 
exceeding ten per cent. of turnover in a State or Union territory in the preceding financial year or five lakh 
rupees, whichever is higher.]  
5[Explanation .—For the purposes of second proviso, the value of exempt supply of services 
provided by way of extending deposits, loans or advances in so far as the consideration is 
represented by way of interest or discount shall not be taken into account for determining the value 
of turnover in a State or Union territory .]

1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 4, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “in lieu of the tax payable by him, an amount calculated at such rate” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “ one crore rupees ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

5. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 93 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
24 
 (2) The registered person shall be eligible to opt under sub -section ( 1), if:— 
1[(a) save as provided in sub -section ( 1), he is not engaged in the supply of services;]  
(b) he is not engaged in making any supply of goods  2[or services]  which are not leviable to tax 
under this Act;  
(c) he is not engaged in making any inter -State outward supplies of goods  2[or services] ; 
(d) he is not engaged in making any supply of 3*** 2[services] through an electronic commerce 
operator who is required to collect tax at source under section 52; 4*** 
(e) he is not a manufacturer of such goods as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the 5[Council ; and]  
6[(f) he is neither a casual taxable person nor a non -resident taxable person:]  
Provided that where more than one registered persons  are having the same Permanent Account Number 
(issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the registered person shall not be eligible to opt for the 
scheme under sub -section ( 1) unless all such registered persons opt to pay tax under that sub -section.  
6[(2A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, but subject to the provisions of 
sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 9, a registered  person, not eligible to opt to pay tax under                   
sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2), whose aggregate turnover in the preceding financial year did not 
exceed fifty lakh rupees, may opt to pay, in lieu of the tax payable by him under sub -section ( 1) of    
section 9, an amount of tax calculated at such rate as may be prescribed, but not exceeding three per cent. 
of the turnover in State or turnover in Union territory, if he is not — 
(a) engaged in making any supply of goods or services which are not leviable to tax under this 
Act; 
(b) engaged in making any inter -State outward supplies of goods or services;  
(c) engaged in making any supply of 3*** services through an electronic commerce operator who 
is required to collect tax at source under section 52;  
(d) a manufacturer of such goods or supplier of such services as may be notified by the 
Government on the recommendations of the Council; and  
(e) a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person:  
Provided that where more than one registered person are  having the same Permanent Account 
Number issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the registered person shall not be 
eligible to opt for the scheme under this sub -section unless all such registered persons opt to pay tax 
under this sub -section.]  
(3) The option availed of by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) 6[or sub -section ( 2A), as the 
case may be ] shall lapse with effect from the day on which his aggregate turnover during a financial year 
exceeds the  limit specified under  sub-section ( 1) 6[or sub -section ( 2A), as the case may be ]. 
(4) A taxable person to whom the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 6[or, as the case may be,                       
sub-section ( 2A)] apply shall not collect any tax from the recipient on supplies made by  him nor shall he 
be entitled to any credit of input tax.  
(5) If the proper officer has reasons to believe that a taxable person has paid tax under sub -section ( 1) 
6[or sub-section ( 2A), as the case may be,]  despite not being eligible, such person shall, in addition to any 
tax that may be payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to a penalty and the

1. Subs. by Act 3 1 of 201 8, s. 5, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Ins. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 119 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).

3. The Words “goods or” omitted by Act 8 of 2023, s. 137 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

4. The word “and” omitted by Act 23 of 2019, s. 93 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

5. Subs. by s. 93, ibid., for “Council :” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

6. Ins. by s. 93, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
25 
 provisions of section 73 or section 74  1[or section 74A]  shall, mutatis mutandis , apply for determination of 
tax and penalty.  
2[Explanation  1.—For the purposes of computing aggregate turnover of a person for determining his 
eligibility to pay tax under this section, the expression “aggregate turnover ” shall include the value of 
supplies made by such person from the 1st day of April of a financial year up to the date when he 
becomes liable for registration under this Act, but shall not include the value of exempt supply of services 
provided by way of extending deposits, loans or advances in so far as the consideration is represented by 
way of interest or discount.  
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of determining the tax payable by a person under this section, the 
expression “turnover in State or turnover in Union territory ” shall not include the value of following 
supplies, namely: — 
(i) supplies from the first day of April of a financial year up to the date when such person 
becomes liable for registration under this Act; and  
(ii) exempt supply of services provided by way of extending deposits, loans or advances in so far 
as the consideration is represented by way of interest or discount.]

11. Power to grant exemption from tax. —(1) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary in 
the public interest so to do, it may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, exempt generally, 
either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, goods or services or both of any 
specified description from the whole or any part of the tax leviable thereon with effect from such date as may 
be specified in such notification.  
(2) Where the Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, by special order in each case, under circumstances of an exceptional 
nature to be stated in such order, exempt from payment of tax any goods or services or both on which tax 
is leviable.  
(3) The Government may, if it considers necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose of clarifying 
the scope or applicability of any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or order issued under            
sub-section ( 2), insert an explanation  in such notification or order, as the case may be, by notification at 
any time within one year of issue of the notification under sub -section ( 1) or order under sub -section ( 2), 
and every such explanation shall have effect as if it had always been the part of the first such notification 
or order, as the case may be.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, where an exemption in respect of any goods or 
services or both from the whole or part of the tax leviable thereon has been granted absolutely, the 
registered person supplying such goods or services or both shall not collect the tax, in excess of the 
effective rate, on such supply of goods or services or both.  
3[11A. Power not to recover Goods and Services Tax not levied or short -levied as a result of 
general practice .— Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Government is satisfied that — 
(a) a practice was, or is, generally prevalent regarding levy of central tax (including non -levy thereof) 
on any supply of goods or services or both; and  
(b) such supplies were, or are, liable to, — 
(i) central tax, in cases where according to the said practice, central tax was not, or is not being, 
levied, or  
(ii) a higher amount of central tax than what was, or is being, levied, in accordance with the said 
practice,  
the Government may, on the recommendation of the Council, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the whole of the central tax payable on such supplies, or, as the case may be, the central tax in

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 115 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 93  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 116 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024)  
26 
 excess of that payable on such supplies, but for the said practice, shall not be required to be paid in  
respect of the supplies on which the central tax was not, or is not being levied, or was, or is being, short -
levied, in accordance with the said practice. ] 
CHAPTER IV  
TIME AND VALUE OF SUPPLY