1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 13 5 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
66 
 (vi) any other relevant record,  
for the scrutiny by the officer or audit party or the chartered accountant or cost accountant within a period 
not exceeding fifteen working days from the day when such demand is made, or such further period as 
may be allowed by the said officer or the audit party or the chartered accountant or cost accountant.

72. Officers to assist proper officers. ––(1) All officers of Police, Railways, Customs, and those 
officers engaged in the collection of land revenue, including village officers, officers of State tax and 
officers of Union territory tax shall assist the proper officers in the implementation of this Act.  
(2) The Government may, by notification, empower and require any other class of officers to assist 
the proper officers in the implementation of this Act when called upon to do so by the Commissioner.  
CHAPTER XV  
DEMANDS AND RECOVERY

73. Determination of tax  1[, pertaining to the period up to Financial Year 2023 -24,] not paid or 
short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised for any reason 
other than fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts .––(1) Where it appears to the proper 
officer that any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax credit has 
been wrongly availed or utilised for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or 
suppression of facts to evade tax, he shall serve notice on the person chargeable with tax which has not been 
so paid or which has been so short paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, or who has 
wrongly availed or utilised input tax credit, requiring him to show cause as to why he should not pay the 
amount specified in the notice along with interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty leviable 
under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) at least three months prior to the 
time limit specified in sub -section ( 10) for issuance of order.  
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may serve 
a statement, containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised for such periods other than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on the person 
chargeable with tax.  
(4) The service of such statement shall be deemed to be service of notice on such person under             
sub-section ( 1), subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon for such tax periods other than those 
covered under sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.  
(5) The person chargeable with tax may, before service of notice under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case 
may be, the statement under sub -section ( 3), pay the amount of tax along with interest payable thereon 
under section 50 on the basis of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by the proper 
officer and inform the proper officer in writing of such payment.  
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not serve any notice under sub -section ( 1) 
or, as the case may be, the statement under sub -section ( 3), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty 
payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under sub -section ( 5) falls short of 
the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in 
respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable.  
(8) Where any person chargeable with tax under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) pays the said tax 
along with interest payable under section 50 within thirty days of issue of show cause notice, no penalty 
shall be payable and all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024 , s. 13 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
67 
 (9) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by person chargeable 
with tax, determine the amount of tax, interest and a penalty equivalent to ten per cent. of tax or ten 
thousand rupees, whichever is higher, due from such person and issue an order.  
(10) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 9) within three years from the due date 
for furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or short paid or input tax 
credit wrongly availed or utilised relates to or within three years from the date of erroneous refund.  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6) or sub -section ( 8), penalty under          
sub-section ( 9) shall be payable where any amount of self -assessed tax or any amount collected as tax has 
not been paid within a period of thirty days from the due date of payment of such tax.  
1[(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for determination of tax pertaining to the 
period up to Financial Year 2023 -24.]

74. Determination of tax  2[, pertaining to the period up to Financial Year 2023 -24,] not paid or 
short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised by reason of fraud 
or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts .––(1) Where it appears to the proper officer that any 
tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or where input tax credit has been wrongly 
availed or utilised by reason of fraud, or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, he 
shall serve notice on the person chargeable with tax which has not been so paid or which has been so short 
paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, or who has wrongly availed or utilised input tax 
credit, requiring him to show cause as to  why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice along 
with interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to the tax specified in the notice.  
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) at least six months prior to the time 
limit specified in sub -section ( 10) for issuance of order.  
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may serve 
a statement, containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised for such periods other than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on the person 
chargeable with tax.  
(4) The service of statement under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be service of notice under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 73, subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon in the said statement, 
except the ground of fraud, or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, for periods 
other than those covered under sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.  
(5) The person chargeable with tax may, before service of notice under sub -section ( 1), pay the 
amount of tax along with interest payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifteen per cent. of 
such tax on the basis of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by the proper officer 
and inform the proper officer in writing of such payment.  
(6) The proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not serve any notice under                     
sub-section ( 1), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty payable under the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder.  
(7) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under sub -section ( 5) falls short of 
the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in 
respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable.  
(8) Where any person chargeable with tax under sub -section ( 1) pays the said tax along with interest 
payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to twenty -five per cent. of such tax within thirty days 
of issue of the notice, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.  
(9) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person 
chargeable with tax, determine the amount of tax, interest and penalty due from such person and issue an 
order.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 13 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by s. 13 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
68 
 (10) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 9) within a period of five years from 
the due date for furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or short paid or 
input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised relates to or within five years from the date of erroneous 
refund.  
(11) Where any person served with an order issued under sub -section ( 9) pays the tax along with 
interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifty per cent. of such tax within 
thirty days of communication of the order, all proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to 
be concluded.  
1[(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for determination of tax pertaining to the 
period up to Financial Year 2023 -24.] 
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of section 73 and this section, — 
(i) the expression “all proceedings in respect of the said notice” shall not include proceedings 
under section 132;  
(ii) where the notice under the same proceedings is issued to the main person liable to pay tax and 
some other persons, and such proceedings against the main person have been concluded under section 
73 or section 74, the proceedings against all the persons liable to pay penalty under 2[sections 122 and 
125] are deemed to be concluded.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[74A. Determination of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised for any reason pertaining to Financial Year 2024 -25 onward .— (1) 
Where it appears to the proper officer that any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously 
refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised, he shall serve notice on the 
person chargeable with tax which has not been so paid or which has been so short paid or to whom the 
refund has erroneously been made, or who has wrongly availed or utilised input tax credit, requiring him 
to show cau se as to why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice along with interest payable 
thereon under section 50 and a penalty leviable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder:  
Provided that no notice shall be issued, if the tax which has not been paid or short paid or erroneously 
refunded or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised in a financial year is less than one 
thousand rupees.  
(2) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub -section ( 1) within forty -two months from the 
due date for furnishing of annual return for the financial year to which the tax not paid or short paid or 
input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised relates to or within forty -two months from the date of 
erroneous refund.  
(3) Where a notice has been issued for any period under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may serve 
a statement, containing the details of tax not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded or input tax credit 
wrongly availed or utilised for such periods other than those covered under sub -section ( 1), on the person 
chargeable with tax.  
(4) The service of such statement shall be deemed to be service of notice on such person under                
sub-section ( 1), subject to the condition that the grounds relied upon for such tax periods other than those 
covered under sub -section ( 1) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice.

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 13 7 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 113, for “ sections 122, 125, 129 and 130” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

3. Explanation 2 omitted by Act 15 of 2024, s. 13 7 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

4. Ins. by s. 13 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
69 
 (5) The penalty in case where any tax which has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, 
or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised, — 
(i) for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of 
facts to evade tax, shall be equivalent to ten per cent. of tax due from such person or ten thousand 
rupees, whichever is higher;  
(ii) for the reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax shall be 
equivalent to the tax due from such person.  
(6) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person 
chargeable with tax, determine the amount of tax, interest and penalty due from such person and issue an 
order.  
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub -section ( 6) within twelve months from the date 
of issuance of notice specified in sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that where the proper officer is not able to issue the order within the specified period, the 
Commissioner, or an officer authorised by the Commissioner senior in rank to the proper officer but not 
below the rank of Joint Commissioner of Central Tax, may, having regard to the reasons for delay in 
issuance of the order under sub -section ( 6), to be recorded in writing, before the expiry of the specified 
period, extend the said period further by a maximum of six months.  
(8) The person chargeable with tax where any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously 
refunded, or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised for any reason, other than the 
reason of fraud or any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, may, — 
(i) before service of notice under sub -section ( 1), pay the amount of tax along with interest 
payable under section 50 of such tax on the basis of his own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as 
ascertained by the proper officer and inform the proper officer in writing of such payment, and the 
proper officer, on receipt of such information shall not serve any notice under sub -section ( 1) or the 
statement under sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty 
payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(ii) pay the said tax along with interest payable under section 50 within sixty days of issue of 
show cause notice, and on doing so, no penalty shall be payable and all proceedings in respect of the 
said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.  
(9) The person chargeable with tax, where any tax has not been paid or short paid or erroneously 
refunded or where input tax credit has been wrongly availed or utilised by reason of fraud, or any wilful -
misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, may, — 
(i) before service of notice under sub -section ( 1), pay the amount of tax along with interest 
payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to fifteen per cent. of such tax on the basis of his 
own ascertainment of such tax or the tax as ascertained by the proper officer and inform the proper 
officer in writing of such payment, and the proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not 
serve any notice under sub -section ( 1), in respect of the tax so paid or any penalty payable under the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(ii) pay the said tax along with interest payable under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to 
twenty -five per cent. of such tax within sixty days of issue of the notice, and on doing so, all 
proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded;  
(iii) pay the tax along with interest payable thereon under section 50 and a penalty equivalent to 
fifty per cent. of such tax within sixty days of communication of the order, and on doing so, all 
proceedings in respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded.  
70 
 (10) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under clause ( i) of sub -section (8) 
or clause ( i) of sub -section ( 9) falls short of the amount actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the 
notice as provided for in sub -section ( 1) in respect of such amount which falls short of the amount 
actually payable.  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 8), penalty under 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 5) shall be payable where any amount of self -assessed tax or any amount 
collected as tax has not been paid within a period of thirty days from the due date of payment of such tax.  
(12) The provisions of this section shall be applicable for determination of tax pertaining to the 
Financial Year 2024 -25 onwards.  
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) the expression “all proceedings in respect of the said notice ” shall not include proceedings 
under section 132;  
(ii) where the notice under the same proceedings is issued to the main person liable to pay tax and 
some other persons, and such proceedings against the main person have been concluded under this 
section, the proceedings against all the persons liable to pay penalty under sections 122 and 125 are 
deemed to be concluded.  
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of this Act, the expression “suppression ” shall mean non -
declaration of facts or information which a taxable person is required to declare in the return, statement, 
report or any other document furnished under this Act or the rules made thereunder, or failure to furnish 
any information on being asked for, in writing, by the proper officer.]

75. General provisions relating to determination of tax. —(1) Where the service of notice or 
issuance of order is stayed by an order of a court or Appellate Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be 
excluded in computing the period specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 10) of section 73 or sub -sections ( 2) 
and ( 10) of section 74  1[or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 7) of section 74A] , as the case may be.  
(2) Where any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court concludes that the notice issued 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 74 is not sustainable for the reason that the charges of fraud or any  
wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax has not been established against the person to 
whom the notice was issued, the proper officer shall determine the tax payable by such person, deeming 
as if the notice were issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 73.  
1[(2A) Where any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court concludes that the penalty under 
clause (ii) of sub -section (5) of section 74A is not sustainable for the reason that the charges of fraud or 
any wilful -misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax has not been established against the person to 
whom the notice was issued, the penalty shall be payable by such person, under clause ( i) of sub -section 
(5) of section 74A.]  
(3) Where any order is required to be issued in pursuance of the direction of the Appellate Authority 
or Appellate Tribunal or a court, such order shall be issued within two years from the date of 
communication of the said direction.  
(4) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a request is received in writing from the person 
chargeable with tax or penalty, or where any adverse decision is contemplated against such person.  
(5) The proper officer shall, if sufficient cause is shown by the person chargeable with tax, grant time 
to the said person and adjourn the hearing for reasons to be recorded in writing:

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 13 9 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
71 
 Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted for more than three times to a person during the 
proceedings.  
(6) The proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant facts and the basis of his decision.  
(7) The amount of tax, interest and penalty demanded in the order shall not be in excess of the amount 
specified in the notice and no demand shall be confirmed on the grounds other than the grounds specified 
in the notice.  
(8) Where the Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court modifies the amount of tax 
determined by the proper officer, the amount of interest and penalty shall stand modified accordingly, 
taking into account the amount of tax so modified.  
(9) The interest on the tax short paid or not paid shall be payable whether or not specified in the order 
determining the tax liability.  
1[(10) The adjudication proceedings shall be deemed to be concluded, if the order is not issued within 
the period specified in sub -section ( 10) of section 73 or in sub -section ( 10) of section 74 or in                            
sub-section ( 7) of section 74A;]   
(11) An issue on which the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has given 
its decision which is prejudicial to the interest of revenue in some other proceedings and an appeal to the 
Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court against such decision of the Appellate Authority 
or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court is pending, the period spent between the date of the decision of 
the Appellate Authority and that of the Appellate Tribunal or the date of decision of t he Appellate 
Tribunal and that of the High Court or the date of the decision of the High Court and that of the Supreme 
Court shall be excluded in computing the period referred to in sub -section ( 10) of section 73 or                
sub-section ( 10) of section 74 2[or sub -section ( 7) of section 74A ] where proceedings are initiated by way 
of issue of a show cause notice under the said sections.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 73 or section 74  2[or section 74A] , where any 
amount of self -assessed tax in accordance with a return furnished under section 39 remains unpaid, either 
wholly or partly, or any amount of interest payable on such tax remains unpaid, the same shall be recovered 
under the provisions of section 79.  
3[Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “self-assessed tax ” shall include 
the tax payable in respect of details of outward supplies furnished under section 37, but not included in 
the return furnished under section 39.]  
(13) Where any penalty is imposed under section 73 or section 74  2[or section 74A] , no penalty for 
the same act or omission shall be imposed on the same person under any other provision of this Act.

76. Tax collected but not paid to Government. —(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any order or direction of any Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court or in any 
other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force, 
every person who has collected from any other person any amount as representing the tax under this Act, 
and has not paid the said amount to the Government, shall forthwith pay the said amount to the 
Government, irrespective of whether the supplies in respect of which such amount was collected are 
taxable or not.

1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024 , s. 13 9, for sub -section ( 10) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by s. 13 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 114 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).  
72 
 (2) Where any amount is required to be paid to the Government under sub -section ( 1), and which has 
not been so paid, the proper officer may serve on the person liable to pay such amount a notice requiring 
him to show cause as to why the said amount as specified in the notice, should not be paid by him to the 
Government and why a penalty equivalent to the amount specified in the notice should not be imposed on 
him under the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person on whom 
the notice is served under sub -section ( 2), determine the amount due from such person and thereupon 
such person shall pay the amount so determined.  
(4) The person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall in addition to paying the amount referred to in         
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) also be liable to pay interest thereon at the rate specified under section 
50 from the date such amount was collected by him to the date such amount is paid by him to the 
Government.  
(5) An opportunity of hearing shall be granted where a request is received in writing from the person 
to whom the notice was issued to show cause.  
(6) The proper officer shall issue an order within one year from the date of issue of the notice.  
(7) Where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of the court or Appellate Tribunal, the period of 
such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of one year.  
(8) The proper officer, in his order, shall set out the relevant facts and the basis of his decision.  
(9) The amount paid to the Government under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall be adjusted 
against the tax payable, if any, by the person in relation to the supplies referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(10) Where any surplus is left after the adjustment under sub -section ( 9), the amount of such surplus 
shall either be credited to the Fund or refunded to the person who has borne the incidence of such amount.  
(11) The person who has borne the incidence of the amount, may apply for the refund of the same in 
accordance with the provisions of section 54.

77. Tax wrongfully collected and paid to Central Government or State Government. —(1) A 
registered person who has paid the Central tax and State tax or, as the case may be , the central tax and the 
Union territory tax on a transaction considered by him to be an intra -State supply, but which is 
subsequently held to be an inter -State supply, shall be refunded the amount of taxes so paid in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) A registered person who has paid integrated tax on a transaction considered by him to be an         
inter-State supply, but which is subsequently held to be an intra -State supply, shall not be required to pay 
any interest on the amount of central tax and State tax or, as the case may be , the Central tax and the 
Union territory tax payable.

78. Initiation of recovery proceedings. —Any amount payable by a taxable person in pursuance of 
an order passed under this Act shall be paid by such person within a period of three months from the date 
of service of such order failing which recovery proceedings shall be initiated:  
Provided that where the proper officer considers it expedient in the interest of revenue, he may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, require the said taxable person to make such payment within such period less 
than a period of three months as may be specified by him.

79. Recovery of tax. —(1) Where any amount payable by a person to the Government under any of 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder is not paid, the proper officer shall proceed to 
recover the amount by one or more of the following modes, namely: –– 
(a) the proper officer may deduct or may require any other specified officer to deduct the amount 
so payable from any money owing to such person which may be under the control of the proper 
officer or such other specified officer;  
73 
 (b) the proper officer may recover or may require any other specified officer to recover the amount so 
payable by detaining and selling any goods belonging to such person which are under the control of the 
proper officer or such other specified officer;  
(c) (i) the proper officer may, by a notice in writing, require any other person from whom money is 
due or may become due to such person or who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account 
of such person, to pay to the Government either forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held, or 
within the time specified in the notice not being before the money becomes due or is held, so much of the 
money as is sufficient to pay the amount due from such person or the whole of the money when it is equal 
to or less than that amount;  
(ii) every person to whom the notice is issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be bound to comply with 
such notice, and in particular, where any such notice is issued to a post office, banking company or an 
insurer, it shall not be necessary to produce any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or any other 
document for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made before payment is made, 
notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary;  
(iii) in case the person to whom a notice under sub -clause ( i) has been issued, fails to make the 
payment in pursuance thereof to the Government, he shall be deemed to be a defaulter in respect of 
the amount specified in the notice and all the consequences of this Act or the rules made thereunder 
shall follow;  
(iv) the officer issuing a notice under sub -clause ( i) may, at any time, amend or revoke such 
notice or extend the time for making any payment in pursuance of the notice;  
(v) any person making any payment in compliance with a notice issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be 
deemed to have made the payment under the authority of the person in default and such payment being 
credited to the Government shall be deemed to constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability 
of such person to the person in default to the extent of the amount specified in the receipt;  
(vi) any person discharging any liability to the person in default after service on him of the notice 
issued under sub -clause ( i) shall be personally liable to the Government to the extent of the liability 
discharged or to the extent of the liability of the person in default for tax, interest and penalty, whichever is 
less; 
(vii) where a person on whom a notice is served under sub -clause ( i) proves to the satisfaction of 
the officer issuing the notice that the money demanded or any part thereof was not due to the person 
in default or that he did not hold any money for or on account of the person in default, at the time the 
notice was served on him, nor is the money demanded or any part thereof, likely to become due to the 
said person or be held for or on account of such person, nothing contained in this section shall be 
deemed to require the person on whom the notice has been served to pay to the Government any such 
money or part thereof;  
(d) the proper officer may, in accordance with the rules to be made in this behalf, distrain any 
movable or immovable property belonging to or under the control of such person, and detain the same 
until the amount payable is paid; and in case, any part of the said amount payable or of the cost of the 
distress or keeping of the property, remains unpaid for a period of thirty days next after any such distress, 
may cause the said property to be sold and with the proceeds of such sale, may satisfy the amount payable 
and the costs including cost of sale remaining unpaid and shall render the surplus amount, if any, to such 
person;  
(e) the proper officer may prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from 
such person and send it to the Collector of the district in which such person owns any property or 
resides or carries on his business or to any officer authorised by the Government and the said 
Collector or the said officer, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover from such person 
the amount specified thereunder as if it were an arrear of land revenue;  
74 
 (f) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
proper officer may file an application to the appropriate Magistrate and such Magistrate shall proceed 
to recover from such person the amount specified thereunder as if it were a fine imposed by him.  
(2) Where the terms of any bond or other instrument executed under this Act or any rules or 
regulations made thereunder provide that any amount due under such instrument may be recovered in the 
manner laid down in sub -section ( 1), the amount may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, 
be recovered in accordance with the provisions of that sub -section.  
(3) Where any amount of tax, interest or penalty is payable by a person to the Government under any 
of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and which remains unpaid, the proper officer of 
State tax or Union territory tax, during the course of recovery of said tax arrears, may recover the amount 
from the said person as if it were an arrear of State tax or Union territory tax and credit the amount so 
recovered to the account of the Government.  
(4) Where the amount recovered under sub -section ( 3) is less than the amount due to the Central 
Government and State Government, the amount to be credited to the account of the respective 
Governments shall be in proportion to the amount due to each such Government.  
1[Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, the word person shall include “distinct persons” as 
referred to in sub -section ( 4) or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 5) of section 25.]

80. Payment of tax and other amount in instalments. —On an application filed by a taxable person, 
the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time for payment or allow payment of 
any amount due under this Act, other than the amount due as per the liability self -assessed in any return, by 
such person in monthly instalments not exceeding twenty four, subject to payment of interest under section 50 
and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where there is default in payment of any one instalment on its due date, the whole 
outstanding balance payable on such date shall become due and payable forthwith and shall, without any 
further notice being served on the person, be liable for recovery.  
 81. Transfer of property to be void in certain cases. —Where a person, after any amount has 
become due from him, creates a charge on or parts with the property belonging to him or in his possession 
by way of sale, mortgage, exchange, or any other mode of transfer whatsoever of any of his properties in 
favour of any other person with the intention of defrauding the Government revenue, such charge or 
transfer shall be void as against any claim in respect of any tax or any other sum payable by the said 
person:  
Provided that, such charge or transfer shall not be void if it is made for adequate consideration, in 
good faith and without notice of the pendency of such proceedings under this Act or without notice of 
such tax or other sum payable by the said person, or with the previous permission of the proper officer.

82. Tax to be first charge on property. —Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law for the time being in force, save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
(31 of 2016), any amount payable by a taxable person or any other person on account of tax, interest or 
penalty which he is liable to pay to the Government shall be a first charge on the property of such taxable 
person or such person.

83. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases. —2[(1) Where, after the initiation 
of any proceeding under Chapter XII, Chapter XIV or Chapter XV, the Commissioner is of the opinion 
that for the purpose of protecting the interest of the Government revenue it is necessary so to do, he may, 
by order in writing, attach provisionally, any property, including bank account, belonging to the taxable 
person or any person specified in sub -section ( 1A) of section 122, in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
(2) Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have effect after the expiry of a period of one 
year from the date of the order made under sub -section ( 1).

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 115, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).  
75 
 84. Continuation and validation of certain recovery proceedings. —Where any notice of demand in 
respect of any tax, penalty, interest or any other amount payable under this Act, (hereafter in this section 
referred to as “Government dues”), is served upon any taxable person or any other person and any appeal or 
revision application is filed or any other proceedings is initiated in respect of such Government dues, then –– 
(a) where such Government dues are enhanced in such appeal, revision or other proceedings, the 
Commissioner shall serve upon the taxable person or any other person another notice of demand in 
respect of the amount by which such Government dues are enhanced and any recovery proceedings in 
relation to such Government dues as are covered by the notice of demand served upon him before the 
disposal of such appeal, revision or other proceedings may, without the service of any fresh notice of 
demand, be continued from the stage at which such proceedings stood immediately before such 
disposal;  
(b) where such Government dues are reduced in such appeal, revision or in other proceedings –– 
(i) it shall not be necessary for the Commissioner to serve upon the taxable person a fresh 
notice of demand;  
(ii) the Commissioner shall give intimation of such reduction to him and to the appropriate 
authority with whom recovery proceedings is pending;  
(iii) any recovery proceedings initiated on the basis of the demand served upon him prior to the 
disposal of such appeal, revision or other proceedings may be continued in relation to the amount so 
reduced from the stage at which such proceedings stood immediately before such disposal.  
CHAPTER XVI  
LIABILITY TO PAY IN CERTAIN CASES

85. Liability in case of transfer of business. —(1) Where a taxable person, liable to pay tax under 
this Act, transfers his business in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease, leave and license, hire or in any other 
manner whatsoever, the taxable person and the person to whom the business is so transferred shall, jointly 
and severally, be liable wholly or to the extent of such transfer, to pay the tax, interest or any penalty due 
from the taxable person up to the time of such transfer, whether such tax, interest or penalty has been 
determined before such transfer, but has remained unpaid or is determined thereafter.  
(2) Where the transferee of a business referred to in sub -section ( 1) carries on such business either 
in his own name or in some other name, he shall be liable to pay tax on the supply of goods or services or 
both effected by him with effect from the date of such transfer and shall, if he is a registered person under 
this Act, apply within the prescribed time for amendment of his certificate of registration.

86. Liability of agent and principal. —Where an agent supplies or receives any taxable goods on 
behalf of his principal, such agent and his principal shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax 
payable on such goods under this Act.

87. Liability in case of amalgamation or merger of companies. —(1) When two or more companies 
are amalgamated or merged in pursuance of an order of court or of Tribunal or otherwise and the order is to 
take effect from a date earlier to the date of the order and any two or more of such companies have supplied 
or received any goods or services or both to or from each other during the period commencing on the date 
from which the order takes effect till the date of the order, then such transactions of supply and receipt shall 
be included in the turnover of supply or receipt of the respective companies and they shall be liable to pay 
tax accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the said order, for the purposes of this Act, the said two or 
more companies shall be treated as distinct companies for the period up to the date of the said order and 
the registration certificates of the said companies shall be cancelled with effect from the date of the said 
order.

88. Liability in case of company in liquidation. —(1) When any company is being wound up 
whether under the orders of a court or Tribunal or otherwise, every person appointed as receiver of any 
76 
 assets of a company (hereafter in this section referred to as the “liquidator”), shall, within thirty days after 
his appointment, give intimation of his appointment to the Commissioner.  
(2) The Commissioner shall, after making such inquiry or calling for such information as he may deem 
fit, notify the liquidator within three months from the date on which he receives intimation of the appointment 
of the liquidator, the amount which in the opinion of the Commissioner would be sufficient to provide for any 
tax, interest or penalty which is then, or is likely thereafter to become, payable by the company.  
(3) When any private company is wound up and any tax, interest or penalty determined under this Act on 
the company for any period, whether before or in the course of or after its liquidation, cannot be recovered, 
then every person who was a director of such company at any time during the period for which the tax was due 
shall, jointly and severally, be liable for the payment of such tax, interest or penalty, unless he proves to the 
satisfaction of the Commissioner that such non -recovery cannot be attributed to any gross neglect, misfeasance 
or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company.

89. Liability of directors of private company. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), where any tax, interest or penalty due from a private company in respect 
of any supply of goods or services or both for any period cannot be recovered, then, every person who was a 
director of the private company during such period shall, jointly and severally, be liable for the payment of 
such tax, interest or penalty unless he proves that the non -recovery cannot be attributed to any gross 
neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company.  
(2) Where a private company is converted into a public company and the tax, interest or penalty in 
respect of any supply of goods or services or both for any period during which such company was a private 
company cannot be recovered before such conversion, then, nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply 
to any person who was a director of such private company in relation to any tax, interest or penalty in respect 
of such supply of goods or services or both of such private company:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any personal penalty imposed on 
such director.

90. Liability of partners of firm to pay tax. —Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary and any 
other law for the time being in force, where any firm is liable to pay any tax, interest or penalty under this 
Act, the firm and each of the partners of the firm shall, jointly and severally, be liable for such payment:  
Provided that where any partner retires from the firm, he or the firm, shall intimate the date of 
retirement of the said partner to the Commissioner by a notice in that behalf in writing and such partner 
shall be liable to pay tax, interest or penalty due up to the date of his retirement whether determined or 
not, on that date:  
Provided further that if no such intimation is given within one month from the date of retirement, the 
liability of such partner under the first proviso shall continue until the date on which such intimation is 
received by the Commissioner.

91. Liability of guardians, trustees, etc. —Where the business in respect of which any tax, interest or 
penalty is payable under this Act is carried on by any guardian, trustee or agent of a minor or other 
incapacitated person on behalf of and for the benefit of such minor or other incapacitated person, the tax, 
interest or penalty shall be levied upon and recoverable from such guardian, trustee or agent in like manner 
and to the same extent as it would be determined and recoverable from any such minor or other incapacitated 
person, as if he were a major or capacitated person and as if he were conducting the business himself, and all 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply accordingly.

92. Liability of Court of Wards, etc. —Where the estate or any portion of the estate of a taxable person 
owning a business in respect of which any tax, interest or penalty is payable under this Act is under the control 
of the Court of Wards, the Administrator General, the Official Trustee or any receiver or manager (including 
any person, whatever be his designation, who in fact manages the business) appointed by or under any order of 
a court, the tax, interest or penalty shall be levied upon and be recoverable from such Court of Wards, 
Administrator General, Official Trustee, receiver or manager in like manner and to the same extent as it would 
77 
 be determined and be recoverable from the taxable person as if he were conducting the business himself, and 
all the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply accordingly.

93. Special provisions regarding liability to pay tax, interest or penalty in certain               
cases. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), 
where a person, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, dies, then –– 
(a) if a business carried on by the person is continued after his death by his legal  representative or 
any other person, such legal  representative or other person, shall be liable to pay tax, interest or 
penalty due from such person under this Act; and  
(b) if the business carried on by the person is discontinued, whether before or after his death, his 
legal representative shall be liable to pay, out of the estate of the deceased, to the extent to which the 
estate is capable of meeting the charge, the tax, interest or penalty due from such person under this 
Act,  
whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined before his death but has remained unpaid or is 
determined after his death.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where a 
taxable person, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a Hindu Undivided Family or an 
association of persons and the property of the Hindu Undivided Family or the association of persons is 
partitioned amongst the various members or groups of members, then, each member or group of members 
shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax, interest or penalty due from the taxable person under this 
Act up to the time of the partition whether such tax, penalty or interest has been determined before partition 
but has remained unpaid or is determined after the partition.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where a 
taxable person, liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, is a firm, and the firm is dissolved, then, 
every person who was a partner shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay the tax, interest or penalty due 
from the firm under this Act up to the time of dissolution whether such tax, interest or penalty has been 
determined before the dissolution, but has remained unpaid or is determined after dissolution.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), where a 
taxable person liable to pay tax, interest or penalty under this Act, –– 
(a) is the guardian of a ward on whose behalf the business is carried on by the guardian; or  
(b) is a trustee who carries on the business under a trust for a beneficiary,  
then, if the guardianship or trust is terminated, the ward or the beneficiary shall be liable to pay the tax, 
interest or penalty due from the taxable person upto the time of the termination of the guardianship or 
trust, whether such tax, interest or penalty has been determined before the termination of guardianship or 
trust but has remained unpaid or is determined thereafter.

94. Liability in other cases. ––(1) Where a taxable person is a firm or an association of persons or a 
Hindu Undivided Family and such firm, association or family has discontinued business –– 
(a) the tax, interest or penalty payable under this Act by such firm, association or family up to the 
date of such discontinuance may be determined as if no such discontinuance had taken place; and  
(b) every person who, at the time of such discontinuance, was a partner of such firm, or a member 
of such association or family, shall, notwithstanding such discontinuance, jointly and severally, be 
liable for the payment of tax and interest determined and penalty imposed and payable by such firm, 
association or family, whether such tax and interest has been determined or penalty imposed prior to 
or after such discontinuance and subject as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may 
be, apply as if every such person or partner or member were himself a taxable person.  
(2) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm or an association of persons, the 
partners of the firm or members of association, as it existed before and as it exists after the reconstitution, 
shall, without prejudice to the provisions of section 90, jointly and severally, be liable to pay tax, interest 
or penalty due from such firm or association for any period before its reconstitution.  
78 
 (3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as may be, apply where the taxable person, being a firm 
or association of persons is dissolved or where the taxable person, being a Hindu Undivided Family, has 
effected partition with respect to the business carried on by it and accordingly references in that sub -section to 
discontinuance shall be construed as reference to dissolution or to partition.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Chapter, –– 
(i) a “Limited Liability Partnership” formed and registered under the provisions of the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009) shall also be considered as a firm;  
(ii) “court” means the District Court, High Court or Supreme Court.  
CHAPTER XVII  
ADVANCE RULING

95.  Definitions. ––In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, –– 
(a) “advance ruling” means a decision provided by the Authority or the Appellate Authority 1[or the 
National Appellate Authority] to an applicant on matters or on questions specified in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 97 or sub-section ( 1) of section 100  1[or of section 101C] , in relation to the supply of goods or 
services or both being undertaken or proposed to be undertaken by the applicant;  
(b) “Appellate Authority” means the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling referred to in 
section 99;  
(c) “applicant” means any person registered or desirous of obtaining registration under this Act;  
(d) “application” means an application made to the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 97;  
(e) “Authority” means the Authority for Advance Ruling referred to in section 96 ; 
 1[(f) “National Appellate Authority ” means the National Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling 
referred to in section 101A.]

96. Authority for advance ruling. ––Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, for the purposes of this 
Act, the Authority for advance ruling constituted under the provisions of a State Goods and Services Tax Act 
or Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be the Authority for advance ruling in 
respect of that State or Union territory.

97. Application for advance ruling. ––(1) An applicant desirous of obtaining an advance ruling 
under this Chapter may make an application in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed, stating the question on which the advance ruling is sought.  
(2) The question on which the advance ruling is sought under this Act, shall be in respect of, –– 
(a) classification of any goods or services or both;  
(b) applicability of a notification issued under the provisions of this Act;  
(c) determination of time and value of supply of goods or services or both;  
(d) admissibility of input tax credit of tax paid or deemed to have been paid;  
(e) determination of the liability to pay tax on any goods or services or both;  
(f) whether applicant is required to be registered;  
(g) whether any particular thing done by the applicant with respect to any goods or services or 
both amounts to or results in a supply of goods or services or both, within the meaning of that term.

1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 104 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
79 
 98. Procedure on receipt of application. ––(1) On receipt of an application, the Authority shall cause 
a copy thereof to be forwarded to the concerned officer and, if necessary, call upon him to furnish the 
relevant records:  
Provided that where any records have been called for by the Authority in any case, such records shall, 
as soon as possible, be returned to the said concerned officer.  
(2) The Authority may, after examining the application and the records called for and after hearing 
the applicant or his authorised representative and the concerned officer or his authorised representative, 
by order, either admit or reject the application:  
Provided that the Authority shall not admit the application where the question raised in the 
application is already pending or decided in any proceedings in the case of an applicant under any of the 
provisions of this Act:  
Provided further that no application shall be rejected under this sub -section unless an opportunity of 
hearing has been given to the applicant:  
Provided also that where the application is rejected, the reasons for such rejection shall be specified 
in the order.  
(3) A copy of every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall be sent to the applicant and to the 
concerned officer.  
(4) Where an application is admitted under sub -section ( 2), the Authority shall, after examining such 
further material as may be placed before it by the applicant or obtained by the Authority and after providing 
an opportunity of being heard to the applicant or his authorised representative as well as to the concerned 
officer or his authorised representative, pronounce its advance ruling on the question specified in the 
application.  
(5) Where the members of the Authority differ on any question on which the advance ruling is sought, 
they shall state the point or points on which they differ and make a reference to the Appellate Authority 
for hearing and decision on such question.  
(6) The Authority shall pronounce its advance ruling in writing within ninety days from the date of 
receipt of application.  
(7) A copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Authority duly signed by the members and 
certified in such manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned officer and the 
jurisdictional officer after such pronouncement.

99. Appellate Authority for advance ruling. ––Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, for the 
purposes of this Act, the Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling constituted under the provisions of a State 
Goods and Services Tax Act or a Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be the 
Appellate Authority in respect of that State or Union territory.

100. Appeal to Appellate Authority. ––(1) The concerned officer, the jurisdictional officer or an 
applicant aggrieved by any advance ruling pronounced under sub -section ( 4) of section 98, may appeal to 
the Appellate Authority.  
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the date on which 
the ruling sought to be appealed against is communicated to the concerned officer, the jurisdictional 
officer and the applicant:  
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by a 
sufficient cause from presenting the appeal within the said period of thirty days, allow it to be presented 
within a further period not exceeding thirty days.  
80 
 (3) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form, accompanied by such fee and verified in 
such manner as may be prescribed.

101. Orders of Appellate Authority. ––(1) The Appellate Authority may, after giving the parties to 
the appeal or reference an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming or 
modifying the ruling appealed against or referred to.  
(2) The order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be passed within a period of ninety days from the 
date of filing of the appeal under section 100 or a reference under sub -section ( 5) of section 98.  
(3) Where the members of the Appellate Authority differ on any point or points referred to in appeal 
or reference, it shall be deemed that no advance ruling can be issued in respect of the question under the 
appeal or reference.  
(4) A copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Appellate Authority duly signed by the Members 
and certified in such manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned officer, the 
jurisdictional officer and to the Authority after such pronouncement.  
1[101A. Constitution of National Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling. —(1) The Government 
shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, constitute, with effect from such date as 
may be specified therein, an Authority known as the National Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling for 
hearing appeals made under section 101B.  
(2) The National Appellate Authority shall consist of — 
(i) the President, who has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or is or has been the Chief Justice 
of a High Court, or is or has been a Judge of a High Court for a period not less than five years;  
(ii) a Technical Member (Centre) who is or has been a member of Indian Revenue (Customs and 
Central Excise) Service, Group A, and has completed at least fifteen years of service in Group A;  
(iii) a Technical Member (State) who is or has been an officer of the State Government not below 
the rank of Additional Commissioner of Value Added Tax or the Additional Commissioner of State 
tax with at least three years of experience in the administration of an existing law or the State Goods 
and Services Tax Act or in the field of finance and taxation.  
(3) The President of the National Appellate Authority shall be appointed by the Government after 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee:  
Provided that in the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President by the 
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior most Member of the National Appellate Authority 
shall act as the President until the date on which a new President, appointed in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office:  
Provided further that where the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness 
or any other cause, the senior most Member of the National Appellate Authority shall discharge the 
functions of the President until the date on which the President resumes his duties.  
(4) The Technical Member (Centre) and Technical Member (State) of the National Appellate 
Authority shall be appointed by the Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee 
consisting of such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) No appointment of the Members of the National Appellate Authority shall be invalid merely by 
the reason of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Selection Committee.  
(6) Before appointing any person as the President or Members of the National Appellate Authority, 
the Government shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or other interests which 
are likely to prejudicially affect his functions as such President or Member.

1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 105 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
81 
 (7) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President and the 
Members of the National Appellate Authority shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither salary and allowances nor other terms and conditions of service of the President 
or Members of the National Appellate Authority shall be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment.  
(8) The President of the National Appellate Authority shall hold office for a term of three years from 
the date on which he enters upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is 
earlier and shall also be eligible for reappointment.  
(9) The Technical Member (Centre) or Technical Member (State) of the National Appellate Authority 
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office, or until he 
attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier and shall also be eligible for reappointment.  
(10) The President or any Member may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the 
Government, resign from his office:  
Provided that the President or Member shall continue to hold office until the expiry of three months 
from the date of receipt of such notice by the Government, or until a person duly appointed as his 
successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
(11) The Government may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, remove from the office  
such President or Member, who — 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of such Government involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such President or Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
such President or Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest:  
Provided that the President or the Member shall not be removed on any of the grounds specified in 
clauses ( d) and ( e), unless he has been informed of the charges against him and has been given an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(12) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 11), the President and Technical Members of 
the National Appellate Authority shall not be removed from their office except by an order made by the 
Government on the ground of proven misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the 
Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India on a reference made to him by the Government 
and such President or Member had been given an opportunity of being heard.  
(13) The Government, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, may suspend from office, 
the President or Technical Members of the National Appellate Authority in respect of whom a reference 
has been made to the Judge of the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 12). 
(14) Subject to the provisions of article 220 of the Constitution, the President or Members of the 
National Appellate Authority, on ceasing to hold their office, shall not be eligible to appear, act or plead 
before the National Appellate Authority where he was the President or , as the case may be, a Member.  
101B. Appeal to National Appellate Authority .—(1) Where, in respect of the questions referred to 
in sub -section ( 2) of section 97, conflicting Advance Rulings are given by the Appellate Authorities of 
two or more States or Union territories or both under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) of section 101, any 
officer authorised by the Commissioner or an applicant, being distinct person referred to in section 25 
aggrieved by such Advance Ruling, may prefer an appeal to National Appellate Authority:  
Provided that the officer shall be from the States in which such Advance Rulings have been given.  
82 
 (2) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the date on which 
the ruling sought to be appealed against is communicated to the applicants, concerned officers and 
jurisdictional officers:  
Provided that the officer authorised by the Commissioner may file appeal within a period of ninety 
days from the date on which the ruling sought to be appealed against is communicated to the concerned 
officer or the jurisdictional officer:  
Provided further that the National Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by a sufficient cause from presenting the appeal within the said period of thirty days, or as the 
case may be, ninety days, allow such appeal to be presented within a further period not exceeding thirty 
days.  
Explanation .—For removal of doubts, it is clarified that the period of thirty days or as the case may 
be, ninety days shall be counted from the date of communication of the last of the conflicting rulings 
sought to be appealed against.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form, accompanied by such fee and verified in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
101C. Order of National Appellate Authority. —(1) The National Appellate Authority may, after 
giving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant, the officer authorised by the Commissioner, all 
Principal Chief Commissioners, Chief Commissioners of Central tax and Chief Commissioner and 
Commissioner of State tax of all States and Chief Commissioner and Commissioner of Union territory tax 
of all Union territories, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming or modifying the rulings appealed 
against.  
(2) If the members of the National Appellate Authority differ in opinion on any point, it shall be 
decided according to the opinion of the majority.  
(3) The order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be passed as far as possible within a period of ninety 
days from the date of filing of the appeal under section 101B.  
(4) A copy of the Advance Ruling pronounced by the National Appellate Authority shall be duly 
signed by the Members and certified in such manner as may be prescribed and shall be sent to the 
applicant, the officer authorised by the Commissioner, the Board, the Chief Commissioner and 
Commissioner of State tax of all States and Chief Commissioner and Commissioner of Union territory tax 
of all Union territories and to the Authority or Appellate Authority, as the case may be, after such 
pronouncement.]

102. Rectification of advance ruling. —The Authority or the Appellate Authority  1[or the National 
Appellate Authority]  may amend any order passed by it under section 98 or section 101  1[or section 101C , 
respectively ,] so as to rectify any error apparent on the face of the record, if such error is noticed by the 
Authority or the Appellate Authority  1[or the National Appellate Authority]  on its own accord, or is 
brought to its notice by the concerned officer, the jurisdictional officer, the applicant 2[, appellant , the 
Authority or the Appellate Authority]  within a period of six months from the date of the order:  
Provided that no rectification which has the effect of enhancing the tax liability or reducing the 
amount of admissible input tax credit shall be made unless the applicant or the appellant has been given 
an opportunity of being heard.

103. Applicability of advance ruling. —(1) The advance ruling pronounced by the Authority or the 
Appellate Authority under this Chapter shall be binding only — 
(a) on the applicant who had sought it in respect of any matter referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 97 for advance ruling;  
(b) on the concerned officer or the jurisdictional officer in respect of the applicant.

1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 106 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

2. Subs. by s. 106, ibid., for “or the appellant” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
83 
 1[(1A) The Advance Ruling pronounced by the National Appellate Authority under this Chapter shall 
be binding on — 
(a) the applicants, being distinct persons, who had sought the ruling under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 101B and all registered persons having the same Permanent Account Number issued under the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(b) the concerned officers and the jurisdictional officers in respect of the applicants referred to in 
clause ( a) and the registered persons having the same Permanent Account Number issued under the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).]  
(2) The advance ruling referred to in sub -section ( 1) 1[and sub -section ( 1A)] shall be binding unless 
the law, facts or circumstances supporting the original advance ruling have changed.

104. Advance ruling to be void in certain circumstances. —(1) Where the Authority or the Appellate 
Authority  2[or the National Appellate Authority]  finds that advance ruling pronounced by it under                    
sub-section ( 4) of section 98 or under  sub-section ( 1) of section 101 2[or under section 101C] has been 
obtained by the applicant or the appellant by fraud or suppression of material facts or misrepresentation of 
facts, it may, by order, declare such ruling to be void ab-initio and thereupon all the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder shall apply to the applicant or the appellant as if such advance ruling had never 
been made:  
Provided that no order shall be passed under this sub -section unless an opportunity of being heard has 
been given to the applicant or the appellant.  
Explanation .––The period beginning with the date of such advance ruling and ending with the date 
of order under this sub -section shall be excluded while computing the period specified in sub -sections ( 2) 
and ( 10) of section 73 or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 10) of section 74  3[or sub -sections ( 2) and ( 7) of section 
74A].  
(2) A copy of the order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be sent to the applicant, the concerned 
officer and the jurisdictional officer.

105. 4[Powers of Authority, Appellate Authority  and National Appellate Authority .]—(1) The 
Authority or the Appellate Authority  5[or the National Appellate Authority]  shall, for the purpose of 
exercising its powers regarding — 
(a) discovery and inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(c) issuing commissions and compelling production of books of account and other records,  
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(2) The Authority or the Appellate Authority 5[or the National Appellate Authority] shall be deemed 
to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Co de 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and every proceeding before the Authority or the Appellate 
Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and 
for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

106. 6[Procedure of Authority , Appellate Authority  and National Appellate Authority .]—The 
Authority or the Appellate Authority  7[or the National Appellate Authority]  shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Chapter, have power to regulate its own procedure.

1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019 , s. 107, (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

2. Ins. by  s. 108, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 40 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

4. Subs. by Act 23 of 2019, s.  109, for “marginal heading”  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

5. Ins. by s. 109,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

6. Subs. by s. 110, ibid., for “marginal heading”  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).

7. Ins. by s. 110, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2020).  
84 
 CHAPTER XVIII  
APPEALS AND REVISION

107. Appeals to Appellate Authority. —(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed 
under this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax 
Act by an adjudicating authority may appeal to such Appellate Authority as may be prescribed within 
three months from the date on which the said decision or order is communicated to such person.  
(2) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon request from the Commissioner of State tax or 
the Commissioner of Union territory tax, call for and examine the record of any proceedings in which an 
adjudicating authority has passed any decision or order under this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act 
or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or 
propriety of the said decision or order and may, by order, direct any officer subordinate to him to apply to the 
Appellate Authority within six months from the date of communication of the said decision or order for the 
determination of such points arising out of the said decision or order as may be specified by the Commissioner 
in his order.  
(3) Where, in pursuance of an order under sub -section ( 2), the authorised officer makes an application 
to the Appellate Authority, such application shall be dealt with by the Appellate Authority as if it were an 
appeal made against the decision or order of the adjudicating authority and such authorised officer were 
an appellant and the provisions of this Act relating to appeals shall apply to such application.  
(4) The Appellate Authority may, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from presenting the appeal within the aforesaid period of three months or six months, as the case may be, 
allow it to be presented within a further period of one month.  
(5) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(6) No appeal shall be filed under sub -section ( 1), unless the appellant has paid — 
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the 
impugned order, as is admitted by him; and  
(b) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the remaining amount of tax in dispute arising from the said 
order, 1[subject to a maximum of 2[twenty]  crore rupees,] in relation to which the appeal has been 
filed.  
3[Provided that no appeal shall be filed against an order under sub -section ( 3) of section 129, unless a 
sum equal to twenty -five per cent. of the penalty has been paid by the appellant.]  
(7) Where the appellant has paid the amount under sub -section ( 6), the recovery proceedings for the 
balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed.  
(8) The Appellate Authority shall give an opportunity to the appellant of being heard.  
(9) The Appellate Authority may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of hearing of an appeal, 
grant time to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for reasons to be recorded in 
writing:  
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing of 
the appeal.  
(10) The Appellate Authority may, at the time of hearing of an appeal, allow an appellant to add any 
ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of appeal, if it is satisfied that the omission of that ground from 
the grounds of appeal was not wilful or unreasonable.

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 41, for “twenty -five” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).