12. Time of supply of goods. —(1) The liability to pay tax on goods shall arise at the time of supply, 
as determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The time of supply of goods shall be the earlier of the following dates, namely: — 
(a) the date of issue of invoice by the supplier or the last date on which he is required, under          
1*** section 31, to issue the invoice with respect to the supply; or  
(b) the date on which the supplier receives the payment with respect to the supply:  
Provided that where the supplier of taxable goods receives an amount up to one thousand rupees in 
excess of the amount indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of such excess amount 
shall, at the option of the said supplier, be the date of issue of invoice in respect of such excess amount.  
Explanation 1.––For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b), “supply” shall be deemed to have been made 
to the extent it is covered by the invoice or, as the case may be, the payment.  
Explanation 2.––For the purposes of clause ( b), “the date on which the supplier receives the payment” 
shall be the date on which the payment is entered in his books of account or the date on which the payment 
is credited to his bank account, whichever is earlier.  
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable to be paid on reverse charge basis, the 
time of supply shall be the earliest of the following dates, namely: — 
(a) the date of the receipt of goods; or  
(b) the date of payment as entered in the books of account of the recipient or the date on which the 
payment is debited in his bank account, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) the date immediately following thirty days from the date of issue of invoice or any other 
document, by whatever name called, in lieu thereof by the supplier:  
Provided that where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or 
clause ( c), the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient of supply.  
(4) In case of supply of vouchers by a supplier, the time of supply shall be — 
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable at that point; or  
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases.  
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), the time of supply shall –– 
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on which such return is to be 
filed; or  
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.  
(6) The time of supply to the extent it relates to an addition in the value of supply by way of interest, 
late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date on which the supplier 
receives such addition in value.

13. Time of supply of services. —(1) The liability to pay tax on services shall arise at the time of 
supply, as determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The time of supply of services shall be the earliest of the following dates, namely: —

1. The words “sub -section ( 1) of” omitted by Act 31 of 2018, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
27 
 (a) the date of issue of invoice by the supplier, if the invoice is issued within the period 
prescribed under 1*** section 31 or the date of receipt of payment, whichever is earlier; or  
(b) the date of provision of service, if the invoice is not issued within the period prescribed under 
1*** section 31 or the date of receipt of payment, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) the date on which the recipient shows the receipt of services in his books of account, in a case 
where the provisions of clause ( a) or clause ( b) do not apply:  
Provided that where the supplier of taxable service receives an amount up to one thousand rupees in 
excess of the amount indicated in the tax invoice, the time of supply to the extent of such excess amount 
shall, at the option of the said supplier, be the date of issue of invoice relating to such excess amount.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b)–– 
(i) the supply shall be deemed to have been made to the extent it is covered by the invoice or, as 
the case may be, the payment;  
(ii) “the date of receipt of payment” shall be the date on which the payment is entered in the 
books of account of the supplier or the date on which the payment is credited to his bank account, 
whichever is earlier.  
(3) In case of supplies in respect of which tax is paid or liable to be paid on reverse charge basis, the 
time of supply shall be the earlier of the following dates, namely: –– 
(a) the date of payment as entered in the books of account of the recipient or the date on which the 
payment is debited in his bank account, whichever is earlier; or  
(b) the date immediately following sixty days from the date of issue of invoice or any other 
document, by whatever name called, in lieu thereof 2[by the supplier, in cases where invoice is required 
to be issued by the supplier; or ] 
3[(c) the date of issue of invoice by the recipient, in cases where invoice is to be issued by the 
recipient: ] 
Provided that where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under clause ( a) or clause ( b) 
3[or clause ( c)], the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient of 
supply:  
Provided further that in case of supply by associated enterprises, where the supplier of service is 
located outside India, the time of supply shall be the date of entry in the books of account of the recipient 
of supply or the date of payment, whichever is earlier.  
(4) In case of supply of vouchers by a supplier, the time of supply shall be –– 
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable at that point; or  
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases.  
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), the time of supply shall –– 
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on which such return is to be 
filed; or  
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.  
(6) The time of supply to the extent it relates to an addition in the value of supply by way of interest, 
late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration shall be the date on which the supplier 
receives such addition in value.

1. The words “sub -section ( 2) of” omitted by Act 31 of 2018, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 117, for “ by the supplier:” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

3. Ins. by, s. 117, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
28 
 14. Change in rate of tax in respect of supply of goods or services. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 12 or section 13, the time of supply, where there is a change in the rate of tax in 
respect of goods or services or both, shall be determined in the following manner, namely: –– 
(a) in case the goods or services or both have been supplied before the change in rate of tax, –– 
(i) where the invoice for the same has been issued and the payment is also received after the 
change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment or the date of issue of 
invoice, whichever is earlier; or  
(ii) where the invoice has been issued prior to the change in rate of tax but payment is 
received after the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of issue of invoice; or  
(iii) where the payment has been received before the change in rate of tax, but the invoice for 
the same is issued after the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of 
payment;  
(b) in case the goods or services or both have been supplied after the change in rate of tax, –– 
(i) where the payment is received after the change in rate of tax but the invoice has been 
issued prior to the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment; 
or 
(ii) where the invoice has been issued and payment is received before the change in rate of 
tax, the time of supply shall be the date of receipt of payment or date of issue of invoice, 
whichever is earlier; or  
(iii) where the invoice has been issued after the change in rate of tax but the payment is 
received before the change in rate of tax, the time of supply shall be the date of issue of invoice:  
Provided that the date of receipt of payment shall be the date of credit in the bank account if 
such credit in the bank account is after four working days from the date of change in the rate of 
tax. 
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, “the date of receipt of payment” shall be the date on 
which the payment is entered in the books of account of the supplier or the date on which the payment is 
credited to his bank account, whichever is earlier.

15. Value of taxable supply. —(1) The value of a supply of goods or services or both shall be the 
transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable for the said supply of goods or services or 
both where the supplier and the recipient of the supply are not related and the price is the sole 
consideration for the supply.  
(2) The value of supply shall include –– 
(a) any taxes, duties, cesses, fees and charges levied under any law for the time being in force 
other than this Act, the State Goods and Services Tax Act, the Union Territory Goods and Services 
Tax Act and the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, if charged separately by the 
supplier;  
(b) any amount that the supplier is liable to pay in relation to such supply but which has been 
incurred by the recipient of the supply and not included in the price actually paid or payable for the 
goods or services or both;  
(c) incidental expenses, including commission and packing, charged by the supplier to the 
recipient of a supply and any amount charged for anything done by the supplier in respect of the 
supply of goods or services or both at the time of, or before delivery of goods or supply of services;  
(d) interest or late fee or penalty for delayed payment of any consideration for any supply; and  
(e) subsidies directly linked to the price excluding subsidies provided by the Central Government 
and the State Governments.  
29 
 Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the amount of subsidy shall be included in the 
value of supply of the supplier who receives the subsidy.  
(3) The value of the supply shall not include any discount which is given –– 
(a) before or at the time of the supply if such discount has been duly recorded in the invoice 
issued in respect of such supply; and  
(b) after the supply has been effected, if — 
(i) such discount is established in terms of an agreement entered into at or before the time of 
such supply and specifically linked to relevant invoices; and  
 (ii) input tax credit as is attributable to the discount on the basis of document issued by the 
supplier has been reversed by the recipient of the supply.  
(4) Where the value of the supply of goods or services or both cannot be determined under                     
sub-section ( 1), the same shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 4), the value of such 
supplies as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council shall be 
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Act, –– 
(a) persons shall be deemed to be “related persons” if –– 
(i) such persons are officers or directors of one another’s businesses;  
(ii) such persons are legally recognised partners in business;  
(iii) such persons are employer and employee;  
(iv) any person directly or indirectly owns, controls or holds twenty -five per cent. or more of 
the outstanding voting stock or shares of both of them;  
(v) one of them directly or indirectly controls the other;  
(vi) both of them are directly or indirectly controlled by a third person;  
(vii) together they directly or indirectly control a third person; or  
(viii) they are members of the same family;  
(b) the term “person” also includes legal persons;  
(c) persons who are associated in the business of one another in that one is the sole agent or sole 
distributor or sole concessionaire, howsoever described, of the other, shall be deemed to be related.  
CHAPTER V  
INPUT TAX CREDIT

16. Eligibility and conditions for taking input tax credit. —(1) Every registered person shall, 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed and in the manner specified in section 49, 
be entitled to take credit of input tax charged on any supply of goods or services or both to him which are 
used or intended to be used in the course or furtherance of his business and the said amount shall be 
credited to the electronic credit ledger of such person.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no registered person shall be entitled to the 
credit of any input tax in respect of any supply of goods or services or both to him unless, –– 
(a) he is in possession of a tax invoice or debit note issued by a supplier registered under this Act, or 
such other tax paying documents as may be prescribed;  
30 
 1[(aa) the details of the invoice or debit note referred to in clause ( a) has been furnished by the 
supplier in the statement of outward supplies and such details have been communicated to the 
recipient of such invoice or debit note in the manner specified under section 37 ;] 
(b) he has received the goods or services or both.  
2[Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, it shall be deemed that the registered person has 
received the goods or, as the case may be, services –– 
(i) where the goods are delivered by the supplier to a recipient or any other person on the direction of 
such registered person, whether acting as an agent or otherwise, before or during movement of goods, 
either by way of transfer of documents of title to goods or otherwise;  
(ii) where the services are provided by the supplier to any person on the direction of and on account of 
such registered person.]  
3[(ba) the details of input tax credit in respect of the said supply communicated to such registered 
person under section 38 has not been restricted;]  
(c) subject to the provisions of 4[section 41  5***], the tax charged in respect of such supply has 
been actually paid to the Government, either in cash or through utilisation  of input tax credit 
admissible in respect of the said supply; and  
(d) he has furnished the return under section 39:  
Provided that where the goods against an invoice are received in lots or instalments, the registered 
person shall be entitled to take credit upon receipt of the last lot or instalment:  
Provided further that where a recipient fails to pay to the supplier of goods or services or both, other than 
the supplies on which tax is payable on reverse charge basis, the amount towards the value of supply along 
with tax payable thereon within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of issue of invoice 
by the supplier, an amount equal to the input tax credit availed by the recipient shall be 6[paid by him 
along with interest payable under section 50 ], in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that the recipient shall be entitled to avail of the credit of input tax on payment made by 
him 7[to the supplier] of the amount towards the value of supply of goods or services or both along with 
tax payable thereon.  
(3) Where the registered person has claimed depreciation on the tax component of the cost of capital 
goods and plant and machinery under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961), the input 
tax credit on the said tax component shall not be allowed.  
(4) A registered person shall not be entitled to take input tax credit in respect of any invoice or debit note 
for supply of goods or services or both after the 8[thirtieth day of November] following the end of financial 
year to which such invoice or 9*** debit note pertains or furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever 
is earlier.

1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 109 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 8 , for The Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Ins. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 100 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 8, for “section 41” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

5. The words “ or section 43A” omitted by Act 6 of 2022, s. 100 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

6. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 138, for “ added to his output tax liability, along with interest thereon” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

7. Ins. by s. 138, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

8. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 100, for “due date of furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of September”      
(w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

9. The words “invoice relation to such” omitted by Act 12 of 2020, s. 120 (w.e.f. 1 -01-2021).  
31 
 1[Provided that the registered person shall be entitled to take input tax credit after the due date of 
furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of September, 2018 till the due date of furnishing 
of the return under the said section for the month of March, 2019 in respect of any invoice or invoice 
relating to such debit note for supply of goods or services or both made during the financial year 2017 -18, 
the details of which have been uploaded by the supplier under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 till the due 
date for furnishing the details under sub-section ( 1) of said section for the month of March, 2019.]  
2[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), in respect of an invoice or debit note for 
supply of goods or services or both pertaining to the Financial Years 2017 -18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20 and 
2020 -21, the registered person shall be entitled to take input tax credit in any return under section 39 
which is filed up to the thirtieth day of November, 2021.  
(6) Where registration of a registered person is cancelled under section 29 and subsequently the 
cancellation of registration is revoked by any order, either under section 30 or pursuant to any order made 
by the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or court and where availment of input tax credit in 
respect of an invoice or debit note was not restricted under sub -section ( 4) on the date of order of 
cancellation of registration, the said person shall be entitled to take the input tax credit in respect of such 
invoice or debit note for supply of goods or services or both, in a return under section 39, –– 
(i) filed up to thirtieth day of November following the financial year to which such invoice or 
debit note pertains or furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier; or  
(ii) for the period from the date of cancellation of registration or the effective date of cancellation 
of registration, as the case may be, till the date of order of revocation of cancellation of registration, 
where such return is filed within thirty days from the date of order of revocation of cancellation of 
registration,  
whichever is later.]

17. Apportionment of credit and blocked credits. —(1) Where the goods or services or both are used 
by the registered person partly for the purpose of any business and partly for other purposes, the amount of 
credit shall be restricted to so much of the input tax as is attributable to the purposes of his business.  
(2) Where the goods or services or both are used by the registered person partly for effecting taxable 
supplies including zero -rated supplies under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act and 
partly for effecting exempt supplies under the said Acts, the amount of credit shall be restricted to so much of 
the input tax as is attributable to the said taxable supplies including zero -rated supplies.  
(3) The value of exempt supply under sub -section ( 2) shall be such as may be prescribed, and shall 
include supplies on which the recipient is liable to pay tax on reverse charge basis, transactions in 
securities, sale of land and, subject to clause ( b) of paragraph 5 of Schedule II, sale of building.  
3[Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression ‘‘value of exempt supply’’ shall 
not include the value of activities or transactions specified in Schedule III,  4[except, — 
(i) the value of activities or transactions specified in paragraph 5 of the said Schedule; and . 
(ii) the value of such activities or transactions as may be prescribed in respect of clause ( a) of 
paragraph 8 of the said Schedule .]] 
(4) A banking company or a financial institution including a non -banking financial company, engaged 
in supplying services by way of accepting deposits, extending loans or advances shall have the option to 
either comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), or avail of, every month, an amount equal to fifty per 
cent. of the eligible input tax credit on inputs, capital goods and input services in that month and the rest 
shall lapse:

1. Ins. by Order No. 02/2018 -Central Tax dated 31 -12-2018.

2. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 11 8 (w.e.f. 1 -07-2017).

3. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

4. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 139, for “ except those specified in paragraph 5 of the said Schedule” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
32 
 Provided that the option once exercised shall not be withdrawn during the remaining part of the 
financial year:  
Provided further that the restriction of fifty per cent. shall not apply to the tax paid on supplies made 
by one registered person to another registered person having the same Permanent Account Number.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 16 and sub -section ( 1) of             
section 18, input tax credit shall not be available in respect of the following, namely: — 
1[(a) motor vehicles for transportation of persons having approved seating capacity of not more 
than thirteen persons (including the driver), except when they are used for making the following 
taxable supplies, namely: — 
(A) further supply of such motor vehicles; or  
(B) transportation of passengers; or  
(C) imparting training on driving such motor vehicles;  
(aa) vessels and aircraft except when they are used –– 
(i) for making the following taxable supplies, namely: — 
(A) further supply of such vessels or aircraft; or  
(B) transportation of passengers; or  
(C) imparting training on navigating such vessels; or  
(D) imparting training on flying such aircraft;  
(ii) for transportation of goods;  
 (ab) services of general insurance, servicing, repair and maintenance in so far as they relate to 
motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( aa): 
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such services shall be available — 
(i) where the motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( aa) are 
used for the purposes specified therein;  
(ii) where received by a taxable person engaged — 
(I) in the manufacture of such motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft; or  
(II) in the supply of general insurance services in respect of such motor vehicles, vessels 
or aircraft insured by him;  
(b) the following supply of goods or services or both — 
(i) food and beverages, outdoor catering, beauty treatment, health services, cosmetic and 
plastic surgery, leasing, renting or hiring of motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft referred to in   
clause ( a) or clause ( aa) except when used for the purposes specified therein, life insurance and 
health insurance:  
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such goods or services or both shall be 
available where an inward supply of such goods or services or both is used by a registered person 
for making an outward taxable supply of the same category of goods or services or both or as an 
element of a taxable composite or mixed supply;  
(ii) membership of a club, health and fitness centre; and

1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 9, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
33 
 (iii) travel benefits extended to employees on vacation such as leave or home travel 
concession:  
Provided that the input tax credit in respect of such goods or services or both shall be 
available, where it is obligatory for an employer to provide the same to its employees under any 
law for the time being in force.]  
(c) works contract services when supplied for construction of an immovable property (other than 
plant and machinery) except where it is an input service for further supply of works contract service;  
(d) goods or services or both received by a taxable person for construction of an immovable property 
(other than 1[plant and machinery ]) on his own account including when such goods or services or both 
are used in the course or furtherance of business.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of clauses ( c) and ( d), the expression “construction” includes            
re-construction, renovation, additions or alterations or repairs, to the extent of capitalisation, to the 
said immovable property;  
(e) goods or services or both on which tax has been paid under section 10;  
(f) goods or services or both received by a non -resident taxable person except on goods imported 
by him;  
2[(fa) goods or services or both received by a taxable person, which are used or intended to be 
used for activities relating to his obligations under corporate social responsibility referred to in 
section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013);]  
(g) goods or services or both used for personal consumption;  
(h) goods lost, stolen, destroyed, written off or disposed of by way of gift or free samples; and  
(i) any tax paid in accordance with the provisions of 3[section 74 in respect of any period upto 
Financial Year 2023 -24]. 
(6) The Government may prescribe the manner in which the credit referred to in sub -sections ( 1)                
and ( 2) may be attributed.  
Explanation. ––For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter VI, the expression “plant and machinery” 
means apparatus, equipment, and machinery fixed to earth by foundation or structural support that are used for 
making outward supply of goods or services or both and includes such foundation and structural supports but 
excludes — 
(i) land, building or any other civil structures;  
(ii) telecommunication towers; and  
(iii) pipelines laid outside the factory premises. ]

18.  Availability of credit in special circumstances. —(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions 
as may be prescribed — 
(a) a person who has applied for registration under this Act within thirty days from the date on 
which he becomes liable to registration and has been granted such registration shall be entitled to take 
credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished 
goods held in stock on the day immediately preceding the date from which he becomes liable to pay 
tax under the provisions of this Act;

1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2025, s. 124, for “plant or machinery” (w.e.f. 01 -07-2017).

2. Ins. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 139 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 11 9, for “ sections 74, 129 and 130” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
34 
 (b) a person who takes registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 25 shall be entitled to take 
credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished 
goods held in stock on the day immediately preceding the date of grant of registration;  
(c) where any registered person ceases to pay tax under section 10, he shall be entitled to take 
credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock, inputs contained in semi -finished or finished 
goods held in stock and on capital goods on the day immediately preceding the date from which he 
becomes liable to pay tax under section 9:  
Provided that the credit on capital goods shall be reduced by such percentage points as may be 
prescribed;  
(d) where an exempt supply of goods or services or both by a registered person becomes a taxable 
supply, such person shall be entitled to take credit of input tax in respect of inputs held in stock and 
inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock relatable to such exempt supply and on 
capital goods exclusively used for such exempt supply on the day immediately preceding the date from 
which such supply becomes taxable:  
Provided that the credit on capital goods shall be reduced by such percentage points as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) A registered person shall not be entitled to take input tax credit under sub -section ( 1) in respect of 
any supply of goods or services or both to him after the expiry of one year from the date of issue of tax 
invoice relating to such supply.  
(3) Where there is a change in the constitution of a registered person on account of sale, merger, demerger, 
amalgamation, lease or transfer of the business with the specific provisions for transfer of liabilities, the said 
registered person shall be allowed to transfer the input tax credit which remains unutilised in his electronic 
credit ledger to such sold, merged, demerged, amalgamated, leased or transferred business in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(4) Where any registered person who has availed of input tax credit opts to pay tax under section 10 or, 
where the goods or services or both supplied by him become wholly exempt, he shall pay an amount, by 
way of debit in the electronic credit ledger or electronic cash ledger, equivalent to the credit of input tax in 
respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock and on 
capital goods, reduced by such percentage points as may be prescribed, on the day immediately preceding 
the date of exercising of such option or, as the case may be, the date of such exemption:  
Provided that after payment of such amount, the balance of input tax credit, if any, lying in his 
electronic credit ledger shall lapse.  
(5) The amount of credit under sub -section ( 1) and the amount payable under sub -section ( 4) shall be 
calculated in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) In case of supply of capital goods or plant and machinery, on which input tax credit has been taken, 
the registered person shall pay an amount equal to the input tax credit taken on the said capital goods or plant 
and machinery reduced by such percentage points as may be prescribed or the tax on the transaction value of 
such capital goods or plant and machinery determined under section 15, whichever is higher:  
Provided that where refractory bricks, moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures are supplied as scrap, the 
taxable person may pay tax on the transaction value of such goods determined under section 15.

19. Taking input tax credit in respect of inputs and capital goods sent for job work. —(1) The 
principal shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be allowed input tax 
credit on inputs sent to a job worker for job work.  
35 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16, the principal shall be 
entitled to take credit of input tax on inputs even if the inputs are directly sent to a job worker for job work 
without being first brought to his place of business.  
(3) Where the inputs sent for job work are not received back by the principal after completion of job 
work or otherwise or are not supplied from the place of business of the job worker in accordance with 
clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 143 within one year of being sent out, it shall be 
deemed that such inputs had been supplied by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said 
inputs were sent out:  
Provided that where the inputs are sent directly to a job worker, the period of one year shall be 
counted from the date of receipt of inputs by the job worker.  
(4) The principal shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be allowed input 
tax credit on capital goods sent to a job worker for job work.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16, the principal 
shall be entitled to take credit of input tax on capital goods even if the capital goods are directly sent to a 
job worker for job work without being first brought to his place of business.  
(6) Where the capital goods sent for job work are not received back by the principal within a period of 
three years of being sent out, it shall be deemed that such capital goods had been supplied by the principal 
to the job worker on the day when the said capital goods were sent out:  
Provided that where the capital goods are sent directly to a job worker, the period of three years shall 
be counted from the date of receipt of capital goods by the job worker.  
(7) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 6) shall apply to moulds and dies, jigs and 
fixtures, or tools sent out to a job worker for job work.  
Explanation .––For the purpose of this section, “principal” means the person referred to in                 
section 143.  
1[20. Manner of distribution of credit by Input Service Distributor. —(1) Any office of the 
supplier of goods or services or both which receives tax invoices towards the receipt of input services, 
including invoices in respect of services liable to tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 9  
2[of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub -section (4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services 
Tax Act, 2017 (13 of 2017)] , for or on behalf of distinct persons referred to in section 25, shall be 
required to be registered as Input Service Distributor under clause ( viii) of section 24 and shall distribute 
the input tax credit in respect of such invoices.  
(2) The Input Service Distributor shall distribute the credit of central tax or integrated tax charged on 
invoices received by him, including the credit of central or integrated tax in respect of services subject to 
levy of tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 9  2[of this Act or under sub -section (3) or 
sub-section (4) of section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (13 of 2017),]  paid by a 
distinct person registered in the same State as the said Input Service Distributor, in such manner, within 
such time and subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The credit of central tax shall be distributed as central tax or integrated tax and integrated tax as 
integrated tax or central tax, by way of issue of a document containing the amount of input tax credit, in 
such manner as may be prescribed.]

21. Manner of recovery of credit distributed in excess. —Where the Input Service Distributor 
distributes the credit in contravention of the provisions contained in section 20 resulting in excess

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2024, s. 12, for section 20 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2025).

2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2025, s. 125 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2025).  
36 
 distribution of credit to one or more recipients of credit, the excess credit so distributed shall be 
recovered from such recipients along with interest, and the provisions of section 73 or                       
section 74   1[or section 74A] , as the case may be, shall, mutatis mutandis , apply for determination of 
amount to be recovered.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGISTRATION

22. Persons liable for registration. —(1) Every supplier shall be liable to be registered under this Act 
in the State or Union territory, other than special category States, from where he makes a taxable supply 
of goods or services or both, if his aggregate turnover in a financial year exceeds twenty lakh rupees:  
Provided that where such person makes taxable supplies of goods or services or both from any of the 
special category States, he shall be liable to be registered if his aggregate turnover in a financial year 
exceeds ten lakh rupees.  
2[Provided further that the Government may, at the request of a special category State and on the 
recommendations of the Council, enhance the aggregate turnover referred to in the first proviso from ten 
lakh rupees to such amount, not exceeding twenty lakh rupees and subject to such conditions and 
limitations, as may be so notified.]  
3[Provided also that the Government may, at the request of a State and on the recommendations of the 
Council, enhance the aggregate turnover from twenty lakh rupees to such amount not exceeding forty lakh 
rupees in case of supplier who is engaged exclusively in the supply of goods, subject to such conditions 
and limitations, as may be notified.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, a person shall be considered to be engaged 
exclusively in the supply of goods even if he is engaged in exempt supply of services provided by way of 
extending deposits, loans or advances in so far as the consideration is represented by way of interest or 
discount.]  
(2) Every person who, on the day immediately preceding the appointed day, is registered or holds a 
licence under an existing law, shall be liable to be registered under this Act with effect from the appointed 
day. 
(3) Where a business carried on by a taxable person registered under this Act is transferred, whether 
on account of succession or otherwise, to another person as a going concern, the transferee or the 
successor, as the case may be, shall be liable to be registered with effect from the date of such transfer or 
succession.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3), in a case of transfer pursuant to 
sanction of a scheme or an arrangement for amalgamation or, as the case may be, demerger of two or more 
companies pursuant to an order of a High Court, Tribunal or otherwise, the transferee shall be liable to be 
registered, with effect from the date on which the Registrar of Companies issues a certificate of 
incorporation giving effect to such order of the High Court or Tribunal.  
Explanation. ––For the purposes of this section, –– 
(i) the expression “aggregate turnover” shall include all supplies made by the taxable person, 
whether on his own account or made on behalf of all his principals;

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 120 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 11, (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 94 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
37 
 (ii) the supply of goods, after completion of job work, by a registered job worker shall be treated 
as the supply of goods by the principal referred to in section 143, and the value of such goods shall 
not be included in the aggregate turnover of the registered job worker;  
(iii) the expression “special category States” shall mean the States as specified in sub -clause ( g) 
of clause ( 4) of article 279A of the Constitution  1[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir *] 2[and 
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Me ghalaya, Sikkim and Uttarakhand ].

23.  Persons not liable for registration. —(1) The following persons shall not be liable to registration, 
namely: –– 
(a) any person engaged exclusively in the business of supplying goods or services or both that are 
not liable to tax or wholly exempt from tax under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services 
Tax Act;  
(b) an agriculturist, to the extent of supply of produce out of cultivation of land.  
3[(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 22 or                  
section 24, the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein,  specify the category of persons who may be 
exempted from obtaining registration  under this Act. ]

24. Compulsory registration in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 22, the following categories of persons shall be required to be registered under 
this Act, –– 
(i) persons making any inter -State taxable supply;  
(ii) casual taxable persons making taxable supply;  
(iii) persons who are required to pay tax under reverse charge;  
(iv) person who are required to pay tax under sub -section ( 5) of section 9;  
(v) non -resident taxable persons making taxable supply;  
(vi) persons who are required to deduct tax under section 51, whether or not separately registered 
under this Act;  
(vii) persons who make taxable supply of goods or services or both on behalf of other taxable 
persons whether as an agent or otherwise;  
(viii) Input Service Distributor, whether or not separately registered under this Act;  
(ix) persons who supply goods or services or both, other than supplies specified under                    
sub-section ( 5) of section 9, through such electronic commerce operator who is required to collect tax 
at source under section 52;  
(x) every electronic commerce operator  4[who is required to collect tax at source under                   
section 52] ; 
(xi) every person supplying online information and database access or retrieval services from a 
place outside India to a person in India, other than a registered person; 5*** 
6[(xia) every person supplying online money gaming from a place outside India to a person in 
India; and]

1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2017).  
*. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.

2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 140, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

4. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

5. The word “and” omitted by Act 30 of 2023, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

6. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
38 
 (xii) such other person or class of persons as may be notified by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Council.

25. Procedure for registration. —(1) Every person who is liable to be registered under section 22 or 
section 24 shall apply for registration in every such State or Union territory in which he is so liable within 
thirty days from the date on which he becomes liable to registration, in such manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person shall apply for registration at 
least five days prior to the commencement of business.  
1[Provided further that a person having a unit, as defined in the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005,  
(28 of 2005)  in a Special Economic Zone or being a Special Economic Zone developer shall have to apply 
for a separate registration, as distinct from his place of business located outside the Special Economic 
Zone in the same State or Union territory.]  
Explanation .—Every person who makes a supply from the territorial waters of India shall obtain 
registration in the coastal State or Union territory where the nearest point of the appropriate baseline is 
located.  
(2) A person seeking registration under this Act shall be granted a single registration in a State or 
Union territory:  
2[Provided that a person having multiple places of business in a State or Union territory may be 
granted a separate registration for each such place of business, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed.]  
(3) A person, though not liable to be registered under section 22 or section 24 may get himself 
registered voluntarily, and all provisions of this Act, as are applicable to a registered person, shall apply to 
such person.  
(4) A person who has obtained or is required to obtain more than one registration, whether in one 
State or Union territory or more than one State or Union territory shall, in respect of each such 
registration, be treated as distinct persons for the purposes of this Act.  
(5) Where a person who has obtained or is required to obtain registration in a State or Union territory 
in respect of an establishment, has an establishment in another State or Union territory, then such 
establishments shall be treated as establishments of distinct persons for the purposes of this Act.  
(6) Every person shall have a Permanent Account Number issued under the Income -tax Act, 1961         
(43 of 1961) in order to be eligible for grant of registration:  
Provided that a person required to deduct tax under section 51 may have, in lieu of a Permanent 
Account Number, a Tax Deduction and Collection Account Number issued under the said Act in order to 
be eligible for grant of registration.  
3[(6A) Every  registered person shall undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of 
Aadhaar number, in such form and manner and within such time as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to the registered person, such person shall be 
offered alternate and viable means of identification in such manner as Government may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, prescribe:  
Provided further that in case of failure to undergo authentication or furnish proof of possession of 
Aadhaar number or furnish alternate and viable means of identification, registration allotted to such 
person shall be deemed to be invalid and the other provisions of this Act shall apply as if such person 
does not have a registration.

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 95 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
39 
 (6B) On and from the date of notification, every individual shall, in order to be eligible for grant of 
registration, undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number, in such manner as 
the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, specify in the said notification:  
Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned to an individual, such individual shall be offered 
alternate and viable means of identification in such manner as the Government may, on the 
recommendations of the Council, specify in the said notification.  
(6C) On and from the date of notification, every person, other than an individual, shall, in order to be 
eligible for grant of registration, undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar 
number of the Karta, Managing Director, whole time Director, such number of partners, Members of 
Managing Committee of Association, Board of Trustees, authorised representative, authorised signatory 
and such other class of persons, in such manner, as the Government may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, specify in the said notification:  
Provided that where such person or class of persons have not been assigned the Aadhaar Number, 
such person or class of persons shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification in such 
manner as the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, specify in the said notification.  
(6D) The provisions of sub -section ( 6A) or sub -section ( 6B) or sub -section ( 6C) shall not apply to 
such person or class of persons or any State or Union territory or part thereof, as the Government may, on 
the recommendations of the Council, specify by notification.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “Aadhaar number ” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause ( a) of section  2 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and 
Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016).]  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), a non -resident taxable person may be 
granted registration under sub -section ( 1) on the basis of such other documents as may be prescribed.  
(8) Where a person who is liable to be registered under this Act fails to obtain registration, the proper 
officer may, without prejudice to any action which may be taken under this Act or under any other law for 
the time being in force, proceed to register such person in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),–– 
(a) any specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral Financial 
Institution and Organisation notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 
(46 of 1947), Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries; and  
(b) any other person or class of persons, as may be notified by the Commissioner,  
shall be granted a Unique Identity Number in such manner and for such purposes, including refund of 
taxes on the notified supplies of goods or services or both received by them, as may be prescribed.  
(10) The registration or the Unique Identity Number shall be granted or rejected after due verification 
in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.  
(11) A certificate of registration shall be issued in such form and with effect from such date as may be 
prescribed.  
(12) A registration or a Unique Identity Number shall be deemed to have been granted after the expiry 
of the period prescribed under sub -section ( 10), if no deficiency has been communicated to the applicant 
within that period.

26. Deemed registration. —(1) The grant of registration or the Unique Identity Number under the State 
Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a 
grant of registration or the Unique Identity Number under this Act subject to the condition that the application 
for registration or the Unique Identity Number has not been rejected under this Act within the time specified 
in sub -section ( 10) of section 25.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 10) of section 25, any rejection of application 
for registration or the Unique Identity Number under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
40 
 Territory Goods and Services Tax Act shall be deemed to be a rejection of application for registration 
under this Act.

27. Special provisions relating to casual taxable person and non -resident taxable person. —(1) 
The certificate of registration issued to a casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person shall be 
valid for the period specified in the application for registration or ninety days from the effective date of 
registration, whichever is earlier and such person shall make taxable supplies only after the issuance of 
the certificate of registration:  
Provided that the proper officer may, on sufficient cause being shown by the said taxable person, 
extend the said period of ninety days by a further period not exceeding ninety days.  
(2) A casual taxable person or a non -resident taxable person shall, at the time of submission of 
application for registration under sub -section ( 1) of section 25, make an advance deposit of tax in an 
amount equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person for the period for which the registration is 
sought:  
Provided that where any extension of time is sought under sub -section ( 1), such taxable person shall 
deposit an additional amount of tax equivalent to the estimated tax liability of such person for the period 
for which the extension is sought.  
(3) The amount deposited under sub -section ( 2) shall be credited to the electronic cash ledger of 
such person and shall be utilised in the manner provided under section 49.

28. Amendment of registration. —(1) Every registered person and a person to whom a Unique 
Identity Number has been assigned shall inform the proper officer of any changes in the information 
furnished at the time of registration or subsequent thereto, in such form and manner and within such 
period as may be prescribed.  
(2) The proper officer may, on the basis of information furnished under sub -section ( 1) or as 
ascertained by him, approve or reject amendments in the registration particulars in such manner and 
within such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that approval of the proper officer shall not be required in respect of amendment of such 
particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that the proper officer shall not reject the application for amendment in the registration 
particulars without giving the person an opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Any rejection or approval of amendments under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a rejection or 
approval under this Act.

29. Cancellation 1[or suspension] of registration. —(1) The proper officer may, either on his own 
motion or on an application filed by the registered person or by his legal heirs, in case of death of such 
person, cancel the registration, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, having 
regard to the circumstances where, –– 
(a) the business has been discontinued, transferred fully for any reason including death of the 
proprietor, amalgamated with other legal entity, demerged or otherwise disposed of; or  
(b) there is any change in the constitution of the business; or  
2[(c) the taxable person is no longer liable to be registered under section 22 or section 24 or 
intends to optout of the registration voluntarily made under sub -section ( 3) of section 25:]

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 121, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).  
41 
 1[Provided that during pendency of the proceedings relating to cancellation of registration filed by 
the registered person, the registration may be suspended for such period and in such manner as may 
be prescribed.]  
(2) The proper officer may cancel the registration of a person from such date, including any 
retrospective date, as he may deem fit, where, –– 
(a) a registered person has contravened such provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder as 
may be prescribed; or  
(b) a person paying tax under section 10 has not furnished 2[the return for a financial year beyond 
three months from the due date of furnishing the said return ]; or 
(c) any registered person, other than a person specified in clause ( b), has not furnished returns for 
3[such continuous tax period as may be prescribed ]; or 
(d) any person who has taken voluntary registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 25 has not 
commenced business within six months from the date of registration; or  
(e) registration has been obtained by means of fraud, wilful misstatement or suppression of facts:  
Provided that the proper officer shall not cancel the registration without giving the person an 
opportunity of being heard.  
 2[Provided further that during pendency of the proceedings relating to cancellation of registration, the 
proper officer may suspend the registration for such period and in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
(3) The cancellation of registration under this section shall not affect the liability of the person to pay tax 
and other dues under this Act or to discharge any obligation under this Act or the rules made thereunder for 
any period prior to the date of cancellation whether or not such tax and other dues are determined before or 
after the date of cancellation.  
(4) The cancellation of registration under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union 
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a cancellation of 
registration under this Act.  
(5) Every registered person whose registration is cancelled shall pay an amount, by way of debit in the 
electronic credit ledger or electronic cash ledger, equivalent to the credit of input tax in respect of inputs 
held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock or capital goods or plant 
and machinery on the day immediately preceding the date of such cancellation or the output tax payable on 
such goods, whichever is higher, calculated in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that in case of capital goods or plant and machinery, the taxable person shall pay an amount 
equal to the input tax credit taken on the said capital goods or plant and machinery, reduced by such 
percentage points as may be prescribed or the tax on the transaction value of such capital goods or plant 
and machinery under section 15, whichever is higher.  
(6) The amount payable under sub -section ( 5) shall be calculated in such manner as may be 
prescribed.

30. Revocation of cancellation of registration. —(1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, 
any registered person, whose registration is cancelled by the proper officer on his own motion, may apply to 
such officer for revocation of cancellation of the registration in 4[such manner, within such time and subject 
to such conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed. ]

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 101, for “ returns for three consecutive tax periods” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

3. Subs. by s. 101, ibid., for “ a continuous period of six months” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 141, for “ the prescribed manner within thirty days from the date of service of the cancellation 
order:” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).   
42 
 1[*   *   *   *   *.] 
(2) The proper officer may, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, by order, either 
revoke cancellation of the registration or reject the application:  
Provided that the application for revocation of cancellation of registration shall not be rejected unless 
the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard.  
2[Provided further that such revocation of cancellation of registration shall be subject to such 
conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed.]  
(3) The revocation of cancellation of registration under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a revocation of 
cancellation of registration under this Act.  
CHAPTER VII  
TAX INVOICE, CREDIT AND DEBIT NOTES

31. Tax invoice. —(1) A registered person supplying taxable goods shall, before or at the time of, — 
(a) removal of goods for supply to the recipient, where the supply involves movement of goods; 
or 
(b) delivery of goods or making available thereof to the recipient, in any other case,  
issue a tax invoice showing the description, quantity and value of goods, the tax charged thereon and such 
other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify 
the categories of goods or supplies in respect of which a tax invoice shall be issued, within such time and 
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) A registered person supplying taxable services shall, before or after the provision of service but 
within a prescribed period, issue a tax invoice, showing the description, value, tax charged thereon and such 
other particulars as may be prescribed:  
3[Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, –– 
(a) specify the categories of services or supplies in respect of which a tax invoice shall be issued, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) subject to the condition mentioned therein, specify the categories of services in respect of 
which –– 
(i) any other document issue in relation to the supply shall be deemed to be  a tax invoice; or  
(ii) tax invoice may not be issued.]  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2)–– 
(a) a registered person may, within one month from the date of issuance of certificate of registration 
and in such manner as may be prescribed, issue a revised invoice against the invoice already issued during 
the period beginning with the effective date of registration till the date of issuance of certificate of 
registration to him;  
(b) a registered person may not issue a tax invoice if the value of the goods or services or both 
supplied is less than two hundred rupees subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be 
prescribed;

1. The proviso o mitted by Act 8 of 2023 , s. 141, (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).