133. Liability of officers and certain other persons. —(1) Where any person engaged in connection 
with the collection of statistics under section 151 or compilation or computerisation thereof or if any 
officer of central tax having access to information specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 150, or if any 
person engaged in connection with the provision of service on the common portal or the agent of common 
portal, wilfully discloses any information or the contents of any return furnished under this Act or rules 
made thereunder otherwise than in execution of his duties under the said sections or for the purposes of 
prosecution for an offence under this Act or under any other Act for the time being in force, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to twenty -five thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any person — 
(a) who is a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section except 
with the previous sanction of the Government;  
(b) who is not a Government servant shall not be prosecuted for any offence under this section 
except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner.

134. Cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, and no court 
inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class, shall try any such offence.

135. Presumption of culpable mental state. —In any prosecution for an offence under this Act 
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court shall presume the existence of 
such mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental 
state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, ––

1. The words, brackets and letters “ or clause ( g) or clause ( j)” omitted by Act 8 of 2023, s. 156, (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
104 
 (i) the expression “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact, and 
belief in, or reason to believe, a fact;  
(ii) a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt 
and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of probability.

136. Relevancy of statements under certain circumstances. —A statement made and signed by a 
person on appearance in response to any summons issued under section 70 during the course of any 
inquiry or proceedings under this Act shall be relevant, for the purpose of proving, in any prosecution for 
an offence under this Act, the truth of the facts which it contains, –– 
(a) when the person who made the statement is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving 
evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or whose presence cannot be obtained 
without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the court 
considers unreasonable; or  
(b) when the person who made the statement is examined as a witness in the case before the court and 
the court is of the opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, the statement should be 
admitted in evidence in the interest of justice.

137. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence committed by a person under this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
(3) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a taxable person being a partnership firm 
or a Limited Liability Partnership or a Hindu Undivided Family or a trust, the partner or karta or 
managing trustee shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly and the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to such 
persons.  
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided 
in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, –– 
(i) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

138. Compounding of offences. —(1) Any offence under this Act may, either before or after the 
institution of prosecution, be compounded by the Commissioner on payment, by the person accused of the 
offence, to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, of such compounding 
amount in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to — 
1[(a) a person who has been allowed to compound once in respect of any of the offences specified 
in clauses ( a) to ( f), (h), (i) and ( l) of sub -section ( 1) of section 132; ]

1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 157, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
105 
 1*                              *                                 *                                  *                                 * 
2[(c) a person who has been accused of committing an offence under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 132;]  
 (d) a person who has been convicted for an offence under this Act by a court;  
3*                               *                                *        *                                 *  
(f) any other class of persons or offences as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that any compounding allowed under the provisions of this section shall not affect 
the proceedings, if any, instituted under any other law:  
Provided also that compounding shall be allowed only after making payment of tax, interest and 
penalty involved in such offences.  
(2) The amount for compounding of offences under this section shall be such as may be prescribed, 
subject to the minimum amount not being less than 4[twenty -five per cent. of the tax involved and the 
maximum amount  not being more than one hundred per cent. of the tax involved ]. 
(3) On payment of such compounding amount as may be determined by the Commissioner, no further 
proceedings shall be initiated under this Act against the accused person in respect of the same offence and 
any criminal proceedings, if already initiated in respect of the said offence, shall stand abated.  
CHAPTER XX  
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

139. Migration of existing taxpayers. —(1) On and from the appointed day, every person registered 
under any of the existing laws and having a valid Permanent Account Number shall be issued a certificate 
of registration on provisional basis, subject to such conditions and in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, which unless replaced by a final certificate of registration under sub -section ( 2), shall be liable 
to be cancelled if the conditions so prescribed are not complied with.  
(2) The final certificate of registration shall be granted in such form and manner and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The certificate of registration issued to a person under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to have not 
been issued if the said registration is cancelled in pursuance of an application filed by such person that he 
was not liable to registration under section 22 or section 24.

140. Transitional arrangements for input tax credit. —(1) A registered person, other than a person 
opting to pay tax under section 10, shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, the amount of 
CENVAT credit  5[of eligible duties]  carried forward in the return relating to the period ending with the day 
immediately preceding the appointed day, furnished by him under the existing law 6[within such time and] in 
such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit in the following 
circumstances, namely: — 
(i) where the said amount of credit is not admissible as input tax credit under this Act; or  
(ii) where he has not furnished all the returns required under the existing law for the period of six 
months immediately preceding the appointed date; or  
(iii) here the said amount of credit relates to goods manufactured and cleared under such 
exemption notifications as are notified by the Government.

1. Cl (b) omitted by Act 8 of 2023 , s. 157, (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

2. Subs. by s. 157, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

3. Cl (e) omitted by s. 157, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

4. Subs. by s. 157, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023 ).

5. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

6. Ins. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 128 (w.e.f. 18 -05-2020).  
106 
 (2) A registered person, other than a person opting to pay tax under section 10, shall be entitled to 
take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of the unavailed CENVAT credit in respect of capital goods, 
not carried forward in a return, furnished under the existing law by him, for the period ending with the 
day immediately preceding the appointed day 1[within such time and] in such manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit unless the said credit was admissible 
as CENVAT credit under the existing law and is also admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “unavailed  CENVAT credit” 
means the amount that remains after subtracting the amount of CENVAT credit already availed in respect 
of capital goods by the taxable person under the existing law from the aggregate amount of CENVAT 
credit to which the said person was entitled in respect of the said capital goods under the existing law.  
(3) A registered person, who was not liable to be registered under the existing law, or who was engaged 
in the manufacture of exempted goods or provision of exempted services, or who was providing works 
contract service and was availing of the benefit of notification No. 26/2012 —Service Tax, dated the 20th 
June, 2012 or a first stage dealer or a second stage dealer or a registered importer or a depot of a 
manufacturer, shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of eligible duties in respect of 
inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished 2[goods held in stock on the appointed 
day, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, subject to] the following conditions, 
namely: –– 
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making taxable supplies under this 
Act; 
(ii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act;  
(iii) the said registered person is in possession of invoice or other prescribed documents 
evidencing payment of duty under the existing law in respect of such inputs;  
(iv) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months 
immediately preceding the appointed day; and  
(v) the supplier of services is not eligible for any abatement under this Act:  
Provided that where a registered person, other than a manufacturer or a supplier of services, is not in 
possession of an invoice or any other documents evidencing payment of duty in respect of inputs, then, 
such registered person shall, subject to such conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be prescribed, 
including that the said taxable person shall pass on the benefit of such credit by way of reduced prices to 
the recipient, be allowed to take credit at such rate and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) A registered person, who was engaged in the manufacture of taxable as well as exempted goods 
under the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) or provision of taxable as well as exempted services under 
Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994), but which are liable to tax under this Act, shall be 
entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, — 
(a) the amount of CENVAT credit carried forward in a return furnished under the existing law by 
him in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1); and  
(b) the amount of CENVAT credit of eligible duties in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs 
contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock on the appointed day, relating to such 
exempted goods or services, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) A registered person shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of eligible duties 
and taxes in respect of inputs or input services received on or after the appointed day but the duty or tax in 
respect of which has been paid by the supplier under the  3[existing law, within such time and in such

1. Ins. by Act 12 of 2020 , s. 128  (w.e.f. 18 -05-2020).

2. Subs. by s. 128, ibid., for “goods held in stock on the appointed day subject to” (w.e.f.  18-5-2020).

3. Subs. by  s. 128, ibid., for “existing law”  (w.e.f.  18-5-2020).  
107 
 manner as may be prescribed] , subject to the condition that the invoice or any other duty or tax paying 
document of the same was recorded in the books of account of such person within a period of thirty days 
from the appointed day:  
Provided that the period of thirty days may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding thirty days:  
Provided further that said registered person shall furnish a statement, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, in respect of credit that has been taken under this sub -section.  
(6) A registered person, who was either paying tax at a fixed rate or paying a fixed amount in lieu of 
the tax payable under the existing law shall be entitled to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of 
eligible duties in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished 1[goods 
held in stock on the appointed day, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, subject to] 
the following conditions, namely: –– 
(i) such inputs or goods are used or intended to be used for making taxable supplies under this 
Act; 
(ii) the said registered person is not paying tax under section 10;  
(iii) the said registered person is eligible for input tax credit on such inputs under this Act;  
(iv) the said registered person is in possession of invoice or other prescribed documents 
evidencing payment of duty under the existing law in respect of inputs; and  
(v) such invoices or other prescribed documents were issued not earlier than twelve months 
immediately preceding the appointed day.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the input tax credit on account of 
any services received prior to the appointed day by an Input Service Distributor shall be eligible for 
distribution as 2[credit under this Act, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed ,  
3[whether the invoices relating to such services are received prior to, on or after, the appointed day] ]. 
(8) Where a registered person having centralised  registration under the existing law has obtained a 
registration under this Act, such person shall be allowed to take, in his electronic credit ledger, credit of 
the amount of CENVAT credit carried forward in a return, furnished under the existing law by him, in 
respect of the period ending with the day immediately preceding the appointed day 4[within such time and 
in such manner ] as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if the registered person furnishes his return for the period ending with the day 
immediately preceding the appointed day within three months of the appointed day, such credit shall be 
allowed subject to the condition that the said return is either an original return or a revised return where the 
credit has been reduced from that claimed earlier:  
Provided further that the registered person shall not be allowed to take credit unless the said amount is 
admissible as input tax credit under this Act:  
Provided also that such credit may be transferred to any of the registered persons having the same 
Permanent Account Number for which the centralised registration was obtained under the existing law.  
(9) Where any CENVAT credit availed for the input services provided under the existing law has 
been reversed due to non -payment of the consideration within a period of three months, such 5[credit can 
be reclaimed within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, subject to] the condition that the 
registered person has made the payment of the consideration for that supply of services within a period of 
three months from the appointed day.

1. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020 , s. 128, for “ goods held in stock on the appointed day subject to” (w.e.f.  18-5-2020).

2. Subs. by  s. 128, ibid., for “credit under this Act even if” (w.e.f.  18-5-2020).

3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 147, for “even if the invoices relating to such services are received on or after the appointed  day” 
(w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

4. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 128, for “ in such manner” (w.e.f.  18-5-2020).

5. Subs. by , s. 128, ibid., for “credit can be reclaimed subject to”  (w.e.f. 18 -5-2020).  
108 
 (10) The amount of credit under sub -sections ( 3), (4) and ( 6) shall be calculated in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of 1[sub-sections (1), (3), ( 4)] and ( 6), the expression “eligible 
duties” means –– 
 (i) the additional duty of excise leviable under section 3 of the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957);  
(ii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff              
Act, 1975 (51 of 1975);  
(iii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 5) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff                    
Act, 1975 (51 of 1975);  
2*     *            *                       *                   * 
(v) the duty of excise specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff                        
Act, 1985 (5 of 1986);  
(vi) the duty of excise specified in the Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985           
(5 of 1986); and  
(vii) the National Calamity Contingent Duty leviable under section 136 of the Finance Act, 2001 
(14 of 2001),  
in respect of inputs held in stock and inputs contained in semi -finished or finished goods held in stock on 
the appointed day.  
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of 3[sub-section s (1) and  (5)], the expression “eligible duties and 
taxes” means –– 
(i) the additional duty of excise leviable under section 3 of the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957);  
(ii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 
(51 of 1975);  
(iii) the additional duty leviable under sub -section ( 5) of section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 
1975 (51 of 1975);  
4*  *  *  *  * 
(v) the duty of excise specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985             
(5 of 1986);  
(vi) the duty of excise specified in the Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985           
(5 of 1986);  
(vii) the National Calamity Contingent Duty leviable under section 136 of the Finance Act, 2001 
(14 of 2001); and  
(viii) the service tax leviable under section 66B of the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994),  
in respect of inputs and input services received on or after the appointed day.  
5[Explanation 3.—For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the expression “eligible duties 
and taxes” excludes any cess which has not been specified in Explanation 1 or Explanation 2 and any 
cess which is collected as additional duty of customs under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Customs 
Tariff Act, 1975  (51 of 1975) .]

141. Transitional provisions relating to job work .––(1) Where any inputs received at a place of 
business had been removed as such or removed after being partially processed to a job worker for further 
processing, testing, repair, reconditioning or any other purpose in accordance with the provisions of 
existing law prior to the appointed day and such inputs are returned to the said place on or after the

1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 28, for “sub -section ( 3), (4)” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

2. Cl. (iv) omitted by s. 28, ibid, (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “sub -section (5)” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

4. Cl. (iv) omitted by  Act 31 of 2018 , s. 28, (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).

5. Ins. by s. 28, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017) .   
109 
 appointed day, no tax shall be payable if such inputs, after completion of the job work or otherwise, are 
returned to the said place within six months from the appointed day:  
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that if such inputs are not returned within the period specified in this sub -section, the 
input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of              
sub-section ( 8) of section 142.  
(2) Where any semi -finished goods had been removed from the place of business to any other 
premises for carrying out certain manufacturing processes in accordance with the provisions of existing 
law prior to the appointed day and such goods (hereafter in this section referred to as “the said goods”) 
are returned to the said place on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable, if the said goods, after 
undergoing manufacturing processes or otherwise, are returned to the said place within six months from 
the appointed day:  
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within the period specified in this                    
sub-section, the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of     
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 8) of section 142:  
Provided also that the manufacturer may, in accordance with the provisions of the existing law, 
transfer the said goods to the premises of any registered person for the purpose of supplying therefrom on 
payment of tax in India or without payment of tax for exports within the period specified in this                 
sub-section.  
(3) Where any excisable goods manufactured at a place of business had been removed without 
payment of duty for carrying out tests or any other process not amounting to manufacture, to any other 
premises, whether registered or not, in accordance with the provisions of existing law prior to the appointed 
day and such goods, are returned to the said place on or after the appointed day, no tax shall be payable if 
the said goods, after undergoing tests or any other process, are returned to the said place within six months 
from the appointed day:  
Provided that the period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that if the said goods are not returned within the period specified in this                
sub-section, the input tax credit shall be liable to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of  
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 8) of section 142:  
Provided also that the manufacturer may, in accordance with the provisions of the existing law, 
transfer the said goods from the said other premises on payment of tax in India or without payment of tax 
for exports within the period specified in this sub -section.  
(4) The tax under sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall not be payable, only if the manufacturer and the 
job worker declare the details of the inputs or goods held in stock by the job worker on behalf of the 
manufacturer on the appointed day in such form and manner and within such time as may be prescribed.

142. Miscellaneous transitional provisions. ––(1) Where any goods on which duty, if any, had been 
paid under the existing law at the time of removal thereof, not being earlier than six months prior to the 
appointed day, are returned to any place of business on or after the appointed day, the registered person shall 
be eligible for refund of the duty paid under the existing law where such goods are returned by a person, other 
than a registered person, to the said place of business within a period of six months from the appointed day 
and such goods are identifiable to the satisfaction of the proper officer:  
Provided that if the said goods are returned by a registered person, the return of such goods shall be 
deemed to be a supply.  
110 
 (2) (a) where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day, the price of any goods 
or services or both is revised upwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had 
removed or provided such goods or services or both shall issue to the recipient a supplementary invoice or 
debit note, containing such particulars as may be prescribed, within thirty days of such price revision and 
for the purposes of this Act such supplementary invoice or debit note shall be deemed to have been issued 
in respect of an outward supply made under this Act;  
(b) where, in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day, the price of any goods or 
services or both is revised downwards on or after the appointed day, the registered person who had removed 
or provided such goods or services or both may issue to the recipient a credit note, containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed, within thirty days of such price revision and for the purposes of this Act 
such credit note shall be deemed to have been issued in respect of an outward supply made under this Act:  
Provided that the registered person shall be allowed to reduce his tax liability on account of issue of 
the credit note only if the recipient of the credit note has reduced his input tax credit corresponding to 
such reduction of tax liability.  
(3) Every claim for refund filed by any person before , on or after the appointed day, for refund of any 
amount of CENVAT credit, duty, tax, interest or any other amount paid under the existing law, shall be 
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of existing law and any amount eventually accruing to him 
shall be paid in cash, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the provisions of existing law 
other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) : 
Provided that where any claim for refund of CENVAT credit is fully or partially rejected, the amount 
so rejected shall lapse:  
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of CENVAT credit where the balance 
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act.  
(4) Every claim for refund filed after the appointed day for refund of any duty or tax paid under existing 
law in respect of the goods or services exported before or after the appointed day, shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the existing law:  
Provided that where any claim for refund of CENVAT credit is fully or partially rejected, the amount 
so rejected shall lapse:  
Provided further that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of CENVAT credit where the balance 
of the said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act.  
(5) Every claim filed by a person after the appointed day for refund of tax paid under the existing law in 
respect of services not provided shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of existing law and 
any amount eventually accruing to him shall be paid in cash, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained under the provisions of existing law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B 
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) . 
(6) (a) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to a claim for CENVAT credit initiated 
whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions of existing law, and any amount of credit found to be admissible to the claimant shall be 
refunded to him in cash, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the provisions of existing 
law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944)  
and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act:  
Provided that no refund shall be allowed of any amount of CENVAT credit where the balance of the 
said amount as on the appointed day has been carried forward under this Act;  
(b) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to recovery of CENVAT credit initiated 
whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions of existing law and if any amount of credit becomes recoverable as a result of such appeal, 
review or reference, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an arrear of tax 
under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
111 
 (7) (a) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to any output duty or tax liability 
initiated whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law, shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the existing law, and if any amount becomes recoverable as a result of 
such appeal, review or reference, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered 
as an arrear of duty or tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input 
tax credit under this Act.  
(b) every proceeding of appeal, review or reference relating to any output duty or tax liability initiated 
whether before, on or after the appointed day under the existing law, shall be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions of the existing law, and any amount found to be admissible to the claimant shall be refunded to 
him in cash, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained under the provisions of existing law other 
than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and the 
amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
(8) (a) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before, 
on or after the appointed day, under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty becomes 
recoverable from the person, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an 
arrear of tax under this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under 
this Act;  
(b) where in pursuance of an assessment or adjudication proceedings instituted, whether before, on or after 
the appointed day, under the existing law, any amount of tax, interest, fine or penalty becomes refundable to the 
taxable person, the same shall be refunded to him in cash under the said law, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in the said law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central 
Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under 
this Act.  
(9) (a) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day and if, 
pursuant to such revision, any amount is found to be recoverable or any amount of CENVAT credit is found to 
be inadmissible, the same shall, unless recovered under the existing law, be recovered as an arrear of tax under 
this Act and the amount so recovered shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act;  
(b) where any return, furnished under the existing law, is revised after the appointed day but within the 
time limit specified for such revision under the existing law and if, pursuant to such revision, any amount is 
found to be refundable or CENVAT credit is found to be admissible to any taxable person, the same shall be 
refunded to him in cash under the existing law, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the said 
law other than the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and 
the amount rejected, if any, shall not be admissible as input tax credit under this Act.  
(10) Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the goods or services or both supplied on or after the 
appointed day in pursuance of a contract entered into prior to the appointed day shall be liable to tax 
under the provisions of this Act.  
(11) (a) notwithstanding anything contained in section 12, no tax shall be payable on goods under this 
Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said goods under the Value Added Tax Act of the State;  
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in section 13, no tax shall be payable on services under this 
Act to the extent the tax was leviable on the said services under Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994                
(32 of 1994);  
(c) where tax was paid on any supply both under the Value Added Tax Act and under Chapter V of the 
Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994) , tax shall be leviable under this Act and the taxable person shall be entitled to 
take credit of value added tax or service tax paid under the existing law to the extent of supplies made after 
the appointed day and such credit shall be calculated in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(12) Where any goods sent on approval basis, not earlier than six months before the appointed day, 
are rejected or not approved by the buyer and returned to the seller on or after the appointed day, no tax 
shall be payable thereon if such goods are returned within six months from the appointed day:  
112 
 Provided that the said period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the 
Commissioner for a further period not exceeding two months:  
Provided further that the tax shall be payable by the person returning the goods if such goods are 
liable to tax under this Act, and are returned after a period specified in this sub -section:  
Provided also that tax shall be payable by the person who has sent the goods on approval basis if such 
goods are liable to tax under this Act, and are not returned within a period specified in this sub -section.  
(13) Where a supplier has made any sale of goods in respect of which tax was required to be deducted 
at source under any law of a State or Union territory relating to Value Added Tax and has also issued an 
invoice for the same before the appointed day, no deduction of tax at source under section 51 shall be 
made by the deductor under the said section where payment to the said supplier is made on or after the 
appointed day.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Chapter, the expressions “capital goods”, “Central Value 
Added Tax (CENVAT) credit”, “first stage dealer”, “second stage dealer”, or “manufacture” shall have 
the same meaning as respectively assigned to them in the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) or the 
rules made thereunder.  
CHAPTER XXI  
MISCELLANEOUS

143. Job work procedure .––(1) A registered person (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
“principal”) may under intimation and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, send any inputs or 
capital goods, without payment of tax, to a job worker for job work and from there subsequently send to 
another job worker and likewise, and shall, –– 
(a) bring back inputs, after completion of job work or otherwise, or capital goods, other than moulds 
and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years, respectively, of their being sent out, 
to any of his place of business, without payment of tax;  
(b) supply such inputs, after completion of job work or otherwise, or capital goods, other than moulds 
and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, within one year and three years, respectively, of their being sent out 
from the place of business of a job worker on payment of tax within India, or with or without payment of 
tax for export, as the case may be:  
Provided that the principal shall not supply the goods from the place of business of a job worker in 
accordance with the provisions of this clause unless the said principal declares the place of business of the 
job worker as his additional place of business except in a case — 
(i) where the job worker is registered under section 25; or  
(ii) where the principal is engaged in the supply of such goods as may be notified by the 
Commissioner.  
1[Provided further that the period of one year and three years may, on sufficient cause being 
shown, be extended by the Commissioner for a further period not exceeding one year and two years 
respectively.]  
(2) The responsibility for keeping proper accounts for the inputs or capital goods shall lie with the 
principal.  
(3) Where the inputs sent for job work are not received back by the principal after completion of job 
work or otherwise in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or are not supplied from 
the place of business of the job worker in accordance with the provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
within a period of one year of their being sent out, it shall be deemed that such inputs had been supplied 
by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said inputs were sent out.  
(4) Where the capital goods, other than moulds and dies, jigs and fixtures, or tools, sent for job work 
are not received back by the principal in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or

1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).     
113 
 are not supplied from the place of business of the job worker in accordance with the provisions of    
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) within a period of three years of their being sent out, it shall be deemed that 
such capital goods had been supplied by the principal to the job worker on the day when the said capital 
goods were sent out.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), any waste and scrap generated 
during the job work may be supplied by the job worker directly from his place of business on payment of 
tax, if such job worker is registered, or by the principal, if the job worker is not registered.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of job work, input includes intermediate goods arising from any treatment 
or process carried out on the inputs by the principal or the job worker.

144. Presumption as to documents in certain cases .––Where any document –– 
(i) is produced by any person under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; or  
(ii) has been seized from the custody or control of any person under this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force; or  
(iii) has been received from any place outside India in the course of any proceedings under this 
Act or any other law for the time being in force,  
and such document is tendered by the prosecution in evidence against him or any other person who is 
tried jointly with him, the court shall — 
(a) unless the contrary is proved by such person, presume — 
(i) the truth of the contents of such document;  
(ii) that the signature and every other part of such document which purports to be in the 
handwriting of any particular person or which the court may reasonably assume to have been 
signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, is in that person’s 
handwriting, and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was executed or 
attested by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed or attested;  
(b) admit the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such 
document is otherwise admissible in evidence.

145. Admissibility of micro films, facsimile copies of documents and computer printouts as 
documents and as evidence .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, — 
(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction of the image or images embodied in such 
micro film (whether enlarged or not); or  
(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or  
(c) a statement contained in a document and included in a printed material produced by a 
computer, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; or  
(d) any information stored electronically in any device or media, including any hard copies made 
of such information,  
shall be deemed to be a document for the purposes of this Act and the rules made thereunder and shall be 
admissible in any proceedings thereunder, without further proof or production of the original, as evidence 
of any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.  
(2) In any proceedings under this Act or the rules made thereunder, where it is desired to give a 
statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate, — 
(a) identifying the document containing the statement and describing the manner in which it was 
produced;  
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that document as may be 
appropriate for the purpose of showing that the document was produced by a computer,  
114 
 shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate and for the purposes of this sub -section it shall be 
sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.

146. Common Portal. —The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify the 
Common Goods and Services Tax Electronic Portal for facilitating registration, payment of tax, furnishing of 
returns, computation and settlement of integrated tax, electronic way bill and for carrying out such other 
functions and for such purposes as may be prescribed.

147. Deemed exports. —The Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify 
certain supplies of goods as deemed exports, where goods supplied do not leave India, and payment for 
such supplies is received either in Indian rupees or in convertible foreign exchange, if such goods are 
manufactured in India.

148. Special procedure for certain processes. —The Government may, on the recommendations of 
the Council, and subject to such conditions and safeguards as may be prescribed, notify certain classes of 
registered persons, and the special procedures to be followed by such persons including those with regard 
to registration, furnishing of return, payment of tax and administration of such persons.

149. Goods and services tax compliance rating. —(1) Every registered person may be assigned a 
goods and services tax compliance rating score by the Government based on his record of compliance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The goods and services tax compliance rating score may be determined on the basis of such 
parameters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The goods and services tax compliance rating score may be updated at periodic intervals and 
intimated to the registered person and also placed in the public domain in such manner as may be 
prescribed.

150. Obligation to furnish information return. —(1) Any person, being — 
(a) a taxable person; or  
(b) a local authority or other public body or association; or  
(c) any authority of the State Government responsible for the collection of value added tax or 
sales tax or State excise duty or an authority of the Central Government responsible for the collection 
of excise duty or customs duty; or  
(d) an income  tax authority appointed under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961                      
(43 of 1961) ; or 
(e) a banking company within the meaning of clause ( a) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); or  
(f) a State Electricity Board or an electricity distribution or transmission licensee under the 
Electricity Act, 2003 ( 36 of 2003) , or any other entity entrusted with such functions by the Central 
Government or the State Government; or  
(g) the Registrar or Sub -Registrar appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908                
(16 of 1908); or  
(h) a Registrar within the meaning of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or  
(i) the registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles under the Motor Vehicles           
Act, 1988 (59 of 1988); or  
(j) the Collector referred to in clause ( c) of section 3 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (30 of 2013); or  
(k) the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956); or  
(l) a depository referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories           
Act, 1996 (22 of 1996); or  
115 
 (m) an officer of the Reserve Bank of India as constituted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); or  
(n) the Goods and Services Tax Network, a company registered under the Companies Act, 2013 
(18 of 2013); or  
(o) a person to whom a Unique Identity Number has been granted under sub -section ( 9) of  
section 25; or  
(p) any other person as may be specified, on the recommendations of the Council, by the 
Government,  
who is responsible for maintaining record of registration or statement of accounts or any periodic return or 
document containing details of payment of tax and other details of transaction of goods or services or both or 
transactions related to a bank account or consumption of electricity or transaction of purchase, sale or 
exchange of goods or property or right or interest in a property under any law for the time being in force, shall 
furnish an information return of the same in respect of such periods, within such time, in such form and 
manner and to such authority or agency as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where the Commissioner, or an officer authorised by him in this behalf, considers that the 
information furnished in the information return is defective, he may intimate the defect to the person who 
has furnished such information return and give him an opportunity of rectifying the defect within a period of 
thirty days from the date of such intimation or within such further period which, on an application made in 
this behalf, the said authority may allow and if the defect is not rectified within the said period of thirty days 
or, the further period so allowed, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this 
Act, such information return shall be treated as not furnished and the provisions of this Act shall apply.  
(3) Where a person who is required to furnish information return has not furnished the same within 
the time specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the said authority may serve upon him a notice 
requiring furnishing of such information return within a period not exceeding ninety days from the date of 
service of the notice and such person shall furnish the information return.  
1[151. Power to call for information .—The Commissioner or an officer authorised by him may, by 
an order, direct any person to furnish information relating to any matter dealt with in connection with this 
Act, within such time, in such form, and in such manner, as may be specified therein.]

152. Bar on disclosure of information. —(1) No information 2*** with respect to any matter given for 
the purposes of section 150 or section 151 shall, without the previous consent in writing of the concerned 
person or his authorised representative, be published in such manner so as to enable such particulars to be 
identified as referring to a particular person and no such information shall be used for the purpose of any 
proceedings under this Act  3[without giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned].  
4*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the publication of any information relating to a class of taxable 
persons or class of transactions, if in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is desirable in the public interest to 
publish such information.

153. Taking assistance from an expert. —Any officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner 
may, having regard to the nature and complexity of the case and the interest of revenue, take assistance of 
any expert at any stage of scrutiny, inquiry, investigation or any other proceedings before him.

154. Power to take samples. —The Commissioner or an officer authorised  by him may take samples 
of goods from the possession of any taxable person, where he considers it necessary, and provide a receipt 
for any samples so taken.

1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 119, for section 151 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

2. The words “ of any individual return or part thereof” omitted by s. 120, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

3. Ins. by s. 120, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).

4. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 120, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2022).  
116 
 155. Burden of proof. —Where any person claims that he is eligible for input tax credit under this 
Act, the burden of proving such claim shall lie on such person.

156. Persons deemed to be public servants. —All persons discharging functions under this Act shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860).

157. Protection of action taken under this Act. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the President, State President, Members, officers or other employees of the Appellate 
Tribunal or any other person authorised by the said Appellate Tribunal for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer appointed or 
authorised under this Act for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act 
or the rules made thereunder.

158. Disclosure of information by a public servant. —(1) All particulars contained in any statement 
made, return furnished or accounts or documents produced in accordance with this Act, or in any record of 
evidence given in the course of any proceedings under this Act (other than proceedings before a criminal 
court), or in any record of any proceedings under this Act shall, save as provided in sub -section ( 3), not be 
disclosed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), no court shall, 
save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), require any officer appointed or authorised under this Act 
to produce before it or to give evidence before it in respect of particulars referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the disclosure of, –– 
(a) any particulars in respect of any statement, return, accounts, documents, evidence, affidavit or 
deposition, for the purpose of any prosecution under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988), or any other law for the time being in force; or  
(b) any particulars to the Central Government or the State Government or to any person acting in 
the implementation of this Act, for the purposes of carrying out the objects of this Act; or  
(c) any particulars when such disclosure is occasioned by the lawful exercise under this Act of any 
process for the service of any notice or recovery of any demand; or  
(d) any particulars to a civil court in any suit or proceedings, to which the Government or any 
authority under this Act is a party, which relates to any matter arising out of any proceedings under 
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force authorising any such authority to exercise 
any powers thereunder; or  
(e) any particulars to any officer appointed for the purpose of audit of tax receipts or refunds of 
the tax imposed by this Act; or  
(f) any particulars where such particulars are relevant for the purposes of any inquiry into the 
conduct of any officer appointed or authorised under this Act, to any person or persons appointed as 
an inquiry officer under any law for the time being in force; or  
(g) any such particulars to an officer of the Central Government or of any State Government, as may 
be necessary for the purpose of enabling that Government to levy or realise any tax or duty; or  
(h) any particulars when such disclosure is occasioned by the lawful exercise by a public servant 
or any other statutory authority, of his or its powers under any law for the time being in force; or  
(i) any particulars relevant to any inquiry into a charge of misconduct in connection with any 
proceedings under this Act against a practising advocate, a tax practitioner, a practising cost accountant, a 
practising chartered accountant, a practising company secretary to the authority empowered to take 
disciplinary action against the members practising the profession of a legal practitioner, a cost 
accountant, a chartered accountant or a company secretary, as the case may be; or  
117 
 (j) any particulars to any agency appointed for the purposes of data entry on any automated 
system or for the purpose of operating, upgrading or maintaining any automated system where such 
agency is contractually bound not to use or disclose such particulars except for the aforesaid 
purposes; or  
(k) any particulars to an officer of the Government as may be necessary for the purposes of any 
other law for the time being in force; or  
(l) any information relating to any class of taxable persons or class of transactions for publication, 
if, in the opinion of the Commissioner, it is desirable in the public interest, to publish such 
information.  
1[158A. Consent based sharing of information furnished by taxable person. — (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 133, 152 and 158,  the following details furnished by a 
registered person may, subject to the provisions  of sub -section ( 2), and on the recommendations of the 
Council, be shared by the  common portal with such other systems as may be notified by the Government, 
in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, namely: —  
(a) particulars furnished in the application for registration under  section 25 or in the return filed 
under section 39 or under section 44;  
(b) the particulars uploaded on the common portal for preparation of invoice, the details of 
outward supplies furnished under section 37 and the particulars uploaded on the common portal for 
generation of documents under section 68;  
(c) such other details as may be prescribed.  
(2) For the purposes of sharing details under sub -section ( 1), the consent shall be obtained, of — 
(a) the supplier, in respect of details furnished under clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1); 
and  
(b) the recipient, in respect of details furnished under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), and under 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) only where such details include identity information of the recipient,  
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no action shall lie 
against the Government or the common portal with respect to any liability arising consequent to 
information shared under this section and there shall be no impact on the liability to pay tax on the 
relevant supply or as per the relevant return. ]

159. Publication of information in respect of persons in certain cases .—(1) If the Commissioner, 
or any other officer authorised  by him in this behalf, is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in 
the public interest to publish the name of any person and any other particulars relating to any proceedings 
or prosecution under this Act in respect of such person, it may cause to be published such name and 
particulars in such manner as it thinks fit.  
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation to any penalty imposed under this Act 
until the time for presenting an appeal to the Appellate Authority under section 107 has expired without 
an appeal having been presented or the appeal, if presented, has been disposed of.  
Explanation .––In the case of firm, company or other association of persons, the names of the partners 
of the firm, directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasurers or managers of the company, or the 
members of the association, as the case may be, may also be published if, in the opinion of the 
Commissioner, or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf, circumstances of the case justify it.

160. Assessment proceedings, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds .—(1) No assessment,              
re-assessment, adjudication, review, revision, appeal, rectification, notice, summons or other proceedings

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 158 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
118 
 done, accepted, made, issued, initiated, or purported to have been done, accepted, made, issued, initiated in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid or deemed to be invalid merely by reason of 
any mistake, defect or omission therein, if such assessment, re -assessment, adjudication, review, revision, 
appeal, rectification, notice, summons or other proceedings are in substance and effect in conformity with or 
according to the intents, purposes and requirements of this Act or any existing law.  
(2) The service of any notice, order or communication shall not be called in question, if the notice, order 
or communication, as the case may be, has already been acted upon by the person to whom it is issued or 
where such service has not been called in question at or in the earlier proceedings commenced, continued or 
finalised pursuant to such notice, order or communication.

161. Rectification of errors apparent on the face of record. —Without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 160, and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, any authority, who 
has passed or issued any decision or order or notice or certificate or any other document, may rectify any 
error which is apparent on the face of record in such decision or order or notice or certificate or any other 
document, either on its own motion or where such error is brought to its notice by any officer appointed under 
this Act or an officer appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or an officer appointed under the 
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act or by the affected person within a period of three months from 
the date of issue of such decision or order or notice or certificate or any other document, as the case may be:  
Provided that no such rectification shall be done after a period of six months from the date of issue of 
such decision or order or notice or certificate or any other document:  
Provided further that the said period of six months shall not apply in such cases where the 
rectification is purely in the nature of correction of a clerical or arithmetical error, arising from any 
accidental slip or omission:  
Provided also that where such rectification adversely affects any person, the principles of natural justice 
shall be followed by the authority carrying out such rectification.

162. Bar on jurisdiction of civil courts. —Save as provided in sections 117 and 118, no civil court 
shall have jurisdiction to deal with or decide any question arising from or relating to anything done or 
purported to be done under this Act.

163. Levy of fee. —Wherever a copy of any order or document is to be provided to any person on an 
application made by him for that purpose, there shall be paid such fee as may be prescribed.

164. Power of Government to make rules. —(1) The Government may, on the recommendations of 
the Council, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Government may make 
rules for all or any of the matters which by this Act are required to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of 
which provisions are to be or may be made by rules.  
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier than the date on which the provisions of this Act 
come into force.  
(4) Any rules made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may provide that a contravention thereof 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees.

165. Power to make regulations. —The Board may, by notification, make regulations consistent with 
this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.

166. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications. —Every rule made by the Government, every 
regulation made by the Board and every notification issued by the Government under this Act, shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
119 
 Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or in the notification, as the case may 
be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or the notification should not be made, the rule or 
regulation or notification, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the 
case may be.

167. Delegation of powers .—The Commissioner may, by notification, direct that subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, any power exercisable by any authority or officer 
under this Act may be exercisable also by another authority or officer as may be specified in such 
notification.