2. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 21 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

3. Subs. by Act 12 of 2020, s. 123 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2021).  
43 
 (c) a registered person supplying exempted goods or services or both or paying tax under the 
provisions of section 10 shall issue, instead of a tax invoice, a bill of supply containing such particulars 
and in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the registered person may not issue a bill of supply if the value of the goods or 
services or both supplied is less than two hundred rupees subject to such conditions and in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(d) a registered person shall, on receipt of advance payment with respect to any supply of goods or 
services or both, issue a receipt voucher or any other document, containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed, evidencing receipt of such payment;  
(e) where, on receipt of advance payment with respect to any supply of goods or services or both 
the registered person issues a receipt voucher, but subsequently no supply is made and no tax invoice 
is issued in pursuance thereof, the said registered person may issue to the person who had made the 
payment, a refund voucher against such payment;  
(f) a registered person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of              
section 9 shall 1[, within the period as may be prescribed,]  issue an invoice in respect of goods or 
services or both received by him from the supplier who is not registered on the date of receipt of 
goods or services or both;  
(g) a registered person who is liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of             
section 9 shall issue a payment voucher at the time of making payment to the supplier.  
1[Explanation .––For the purposes of clause ( f), the expression “supplier who is not registered ” 
shall include the supplier who is registered solely for the purpose of deduction of tax under                  
section 51.]  
(4) In case of continuous supply of goods, where successive statements of accounts or successive 
payments are involved, the invoice shall be issued before or at the time each such statement is issued or, 
as the case may be, each such payment is received.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3), in case of continuous supply of 
services, –– 
(a) where the due date of payment is ascertainable from the contract, the invoice shall be issued 
on or before the due date of payment;  
(b) where the due date of payment is not ascertainable from the contract, the invoice shall be 
issued before or at the time when the supplier of service receives the payment;  
(c) where the payment is linked to the completion of an event, the invoice shall be issued on or 
before the date of completion of that event.  
(6) In a case where the supply of services ceases under a contract before the completion of the supply, 
the invoice shall be issued at the time when the supply ceases and such invoice shall be issued to the 
extent of the supply made before such cessation.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where the goods being sent or taken on 
approval for sale or return are removed before the supply takes place, the invoice shall be issued before or 
at the time of supply or six months from the date of removal, whichever is earlier.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, the expression “tax invoice” shall include any revised 
invoice issued by the supplier in respect of a supply made earlier.  
2[31A. Facility of digital payment to recipient. —The Government may, on the recommendations of 
the Council, prescribe a class of registered persons who shall provide prescribed modes of electronic 
payment to the recipient of supply of goods or services or both made by him and give option to such

1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 122 (w.e.f. 27 -9-2024).

2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 96 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
44 
 recipient to make payment accordingly, in such manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as 
may be prescribed.]

32. Prohibition of unauthorised  collection of tax. —(1) A person who is not a registered person 
shall not collect in respect of any supply of goods or services or both any amount by way of tax under this 
Act. 
(2) No registered person shall collect tax except in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder.

33. Amount of tax to be indicated in tax invoice and other documents. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, where any supply is made for a 
consideration, every person who is liable to pay tax for such supply shall prominently indicate in all 
documents relating to assessment, tax invoice and other like documents, the amount of tax which shall 
form part of the price at which such supply is made.

34. Credit and debit notes. —(1) 1[Where one or more  tax invoice s have] been issued for supply of 
any goods or services or both and the taxable value or tax charged in that tax invoice is found to exceed 
the taxable value or tax payable in respect of such supply, or where the goods supplied are returned by the 
recipient, or where goods or services or both supplied are found to be deficient, the registered person, who 
has supplied such goods or services or both, may issue to the recipient 2[one or more credit notes for 
supplies made in a financial year ] containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any registered person who issues a credit note in relation to a supply of goods or services or both 
shall declare the details of such credit note in the return for the month during which such credit note has 
been issued but not later than 3[the thirtieth day of November ] following the end of the financial year in 
which such supply was made, or the date of furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier, 
and the tax liability shall be adjusted in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier shall be permitted, if the incidence of 
tax and interest on such supply has been passed on to any other person.  
(3) 1[Where one or more tax invoices have] been issued for supply of any goods or services or both 
and the taxable value or tax charged in that tax invoice is found to be less than the taxable value or tax 
payable in respect of such supply, the registered person, who has supplied such goods or services or both, 
shall issue to the recipient 4[one or more debit  notes for supplies made in a financial year]  containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any registered person who issues a debit note in relation to a supply of goods or services or both 
shall declare the details of such debit note in the return for the month during which such debit note has 
been issued and the tax liability shall be adjusted in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Act, the expression “debit note” shall include a supplementary 
invoice.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS

35. Accounts and other records. —(1) Every registered person shall keep and maintain, at his 
principal place of business, as mentioned in the certificate of registration, a true and correct account of — 
(a) production or manufacture of goods;  
(b) inward and outward supply of goods or services or both;  
(c) stock of goods;

1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 15, for “Where a tax invoice has” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “a credit note” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 102, for “September” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Subs. by  Act 31 of 2018 , s. 15, for “a debit note” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
45 
 (d) input tax credit availed;  
(e) output tax payable and paid; and  
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where more than one place of business is specified in the certificate of registration, the 
accounts relating to each place of business shall be kept at such places of business:  
Provided further that the registered person may keep and maintain such accounts and other particulars  
in electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every owner or operator of warehouse or godown or any other place used for storage of goods and 
every transporter, irrespective of whether he is a registered person or not, shall maintain records of the 
consigner, consignee and other relevant details of the goods in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Commissioner may notify a class of taxable persons to maintain additional accounts or 
documents for such purpose as may be specified therein.  
(4) Where the Commissioner considers that any class of taxable person is not in a position to keep 
and maintain accounts in accordance with the provisions of this section, he may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, permit such class of taxable persons to maintain accounts in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any department of the Central 
Government or a State Government or a local authority, whose books of account are subject to audit by 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or an auditor appointed for auditing the accounts of local 
authorities under any law for the time being in force.]  
(6) Subject to the provisions of clause ( h) of sub-section ( 5) of section 17, where the registered 
person fails to account for the goods or services or both in accordance with the provisions of                     
sub-section ( 1), the proper officer shall determine the amount of tax payable on the goods or services or 
both that are not accounted for, as if such goods or services or both had been supplied by such person 
and the provisions of section 73 or section 74  3[or section 74A] , as the case may be, shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply for determination of such tax.

36. Period of retention of accounts. —Every registered person required to keep and maintain books 
of account or other records in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 35 shall retain 
them until the expiry of seventy -two months from the due date of furnishing of annual return for the year 
pertaining to such accounts and records:  
Provided that a registered person, who is a party to an appeal or revision or any other proceedings 
before any Appellate Authority or Revisional Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court, whether filed by him 
or by the Commissioner, or is under investigation for an offence under Chapter XIX, shall retain the books 
of account and other records pertaining to the subject matter of such appeal or revision or proceedings or 
investigation for a period of one year after final disposal of such appeal or revision or proceedings or 
investigation, or for the period specified above, whichever is later.  
CHAPTER IX  
RETURNS

37. Furnishing details of outward supplies. —(1) Every registered person, other than an Input 
Service Distributor, a non -resident taxable person and a person paying tax under the provisions of                
section 10 or section 51 or section 52, shall furnish, electronically,   4[subject to such conditions and 
restrictions and ] in such form and manner as may be prescribed, the details of outward supplies of goods 
or services or both effected during a tax period on or before the tenth day of the month succeeding the

1. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by Act 13 of 2021, s. 110 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2021) .

2. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 1 23 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).

4. Ins. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 103 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).  
46 
 said tax period and such details 1[shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions, within such time and in 
such manner as may be prescribed, be communicated to the recipient of the said supplies ]: 
2*    *    *    * 
3[Provided that]  the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, extend 
the time limit for furnishing such details for such class of taxable persons as may be specified therein:  
4[Provided further that]  any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of State tax or 
Commissioner of Union territory tax shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.  
5*    *    *    * 
(3) Any registered person, who has furnished the details under sub -section ( 1) for any tax period 6***, 
shall, upon discovery of any error or omission therein, rectify such error or omission in such manner as 
may be prescribed, and shall pay the tax and interest, if any, in case there is a short payment of tax on 
account of such error or omission, in the return to be furnished for such tax period:  
Provided that no rectification of error or omission in respect of the details furnished under                 
sub-section ( 1) shall be allowed after 7[the thirtieth day of November ] following the end of the financial 
year to which such details pertain, or furnishing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier.  
8[Provided further that the rectification of error or omission in respect of the details furnished under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be allowed after furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of 
September, 2018 till the due date for furnishing the details under sub -section ( 1) for the month of March, 
2019 or for the quarter January, 2019 to March, 2019.]  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression “details of outward supplies” shall 
include details of invoices, debit notes, credit notes and revised invoices issued in relation to outward 
supplies made during any tax period.  
9[(4) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish the details of outward supplies under                 
sub-section ( 1) for a tax period, if the details of outward supplies for any of the previous tax periods has 
not been furnished by him:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, subject 
to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a class of 
registered persons to furnish the details of outward supplies under sub -section ( 1), even if he has not 
furnished the details of outward supplies for one or more previous tax periods.]  
10[(5) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish the details of outward supplies under                  
sub-section ( 1) for a tax period after the expiry of a period of three years from the due date of furnishing 
the said details:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, subject 
to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a class of 
registered persons to furnish the details of outward supplies for a tax period under sub -section ( 1), even 
after the expiry of the said period of three years from the due date of furnishing the said details.]

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022 , s. 103, for certain words  (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

2. First p roviso omitted by s. 103, ibid (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

3. Subs. by s. 103, ibid., for “Provided further that” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Subs. by s. 103, ibid., “Provided also that” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

5. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 103, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

6. The words “and which have remained unmatched under section 42 or section 43” omitted by s. 103, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022) .

7. Subs. by s. 103,  ibid., for “furnishing of the return under section 39 for the month of September” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

8. Ins. by vide Order No. 02/2018 -Central Tax dated 31 -12-2018.

9. Ins. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 103 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

10. Ins. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 142 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
47 
 1[38. Communication of details of inward supplies input tax credit. —(1) The details of outward 
supplies furnished by the registered persons under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 and of such other supplies 
as may be prescribed, and an auto -generated statement containing the details of input tax credit shall be 
made available electronically to the recipients of such supplies in such form and manner, within such 
time, and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The auto -generated statement under sub -section ( 1) shall consist of ––  
(a) details of inward supplies in respect of which credit of input tax may be available to the 
recipient; and  
(b) details of supplies in respect of which such credit cannot be availed, whether wholly or partly, 
by the recipient, on account of the details of the said supplies being furnished under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 37, ––  
(i) by any registered person within such period of taking registration as may be prescribed; or  
(ii) by any registered person, who has defaulted in payment of tax and where such default has 
continued for such period as may be prescribed; or  
(iii) by any registered person, the output tax payable by whom in accordance with the 
statement of outward supplies furnished by him under the said sub -section during such period, as 
may be prescribed, exceeds the output tax paid by him during the said period by such limit as 
may be prescribed; or  
(iv) by any registered person who, during such period as may be prescribed, has availed credit 
of input tax of an amount that exceeds the credit that can be availed by him in accordance with 
clause ( a), by such limit as may be prescribed; or  
(v) by any registered person, who has defaulted in discharging his tax liability in accordance 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 12) of section 49 subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be prescribed; or  
(vi) by such other class of persons as may be prescribed .]

39. Furnishing of returns. —2[(1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor or 
a non -resident taxable person or a person paying tax under the provisions of section 10 or section 51 or 
section 52 shall, for every calendar month or part thereof, furnish, a return, electronically, of inward and 
outward supplies of goods or services or both, input tax credit availed, tax payable, tax paid and such 
other particulars, in such form and manner, and within such time, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, notify certain class of 
registered persons who shall furnish a return for every quarter or part thereof, subject to such conditions 
and restrictions as may be specified therein.  
(2) A registered person paying tax under the provisions of section 10, shall, for each financial year or 
part thereof, furnish a return, electronically, of turnover in the State or Union territory, inward supplies of 
goods or services or both, tax payable, tax paid and such other particulars in such form and manner, and 
within such time, as may be prescribed.]  
3[(3) Every registered person required to deduct tax at source under section 51 shall electronically 
furnish a return for every calendar month of the deductions made during the month in such form and 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the said registered person shall furnish a return for every calendar month whether or not 
any deductions have been made during the said month.]

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 104, for section 38 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

2. Subs. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 97, for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 10 -11-2020).

3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2024, s. 12 4, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2024).  
48 
  (4) Every taxable person registered as an Input Service Distributor shall, for every calendar month or 
part thereof, furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, within 
thirteen days after the end of such month.  
(5) Every registered non -resident taxable person shall, for every calendar month or part thereof, 
furnish, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, a return, electronically, within 1[thirteen]  days 
after the end of a calendar month or within seven days after the last day of the period of registration 
specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 27, whichever is earlier.  
(6) The Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, extend the time 
limit for furnishing the returns under this section for such class of registered persons as may be specified 
therein:  
Provided that any extension of time limit notified by the Commissioner of State tax or Union territory 
tax shall be deemed to be notified by the Commissioner.  
2[(7) Every  registered  person who is required to furnish a return under sub -section ( 1), other than the 
person referred to in the proviso thereto, or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 5), shall pay to the 
Government the tax due as per such return not later than the last date on which he is required to furnish 
such return:  
3[Provided that every registered person furnishing return under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) shall pay 
to the Government, in such form and manner, and within such time, as may be prescribed, –– 
(a) an amount equal to the tax due taking into account inward and outward supplies of goods or 
services or both, input tax credit availed, tax payable and such other particulars during a month; or  
(b) in lieu of the amount referred to in clause ( a), an amount determined in such manner and 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed .] 
Provided further that every registered person furnishing return under sub -section ( 2) shall pay to the 
Government, the tax due taking into account turnover in the State or Union territory, inward supplies of 
goods or services or both, tax payable, and such other particulars during a quarter, in such form and 
manner, and within such time,  as may be prescribed.]  
 (8) Every registered person who is required to furnish a return under sub -section ( 1) or                             
sub-section ( 2) shall furnish a return for every tax period whether or not any supplies of goods or services 
or both have been made during such tax period.  
(9) 4[Where] any registered person after furnishing a return under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) discovers any omission or incorrect particulars 
therein, other than as a result of scrutiny, audit, inspection or enforcement activity by the tax authorities, 
he shall rectify such omission or incorrect particulars  5[in such form and manner as may  be prescribe d], 
subject to payment of interest under this Act:  
Provided that no such rectification of any omission or incorrect particulars shall be allowed after 6[the 
thirtieth day of November] following 7[the end of the financial year  to which such details pertain] , or the 
actual date of furnishing of relevant annual return, whichever is earlier.

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 105, for “twenty” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

2. Subs. by Act 23 of 2019, s. 97, for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f. 10 -11-2020).

3. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 105, for the first proviso (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Subs. by s. 105, ibid., for “Subject to the provisions of sections 37 and 38, if” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

5. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 17, for “in the return to be furnished for the month or quarter during which such omission or 
incorrect particulars are noticed” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

6. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 105, for “ the due date for furnishing of return for the month of September or second quarter”              
(w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

7. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 17, for “the end of the financial year” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
49 
 (10) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish a return for a tax period if the return for any 
of the previous tax periods  1[or the details of outward supplies under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 for the 
said tax period has not been furnished by him:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, subject 
to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a class of 
registered persons to furnish the return, even if he has not furnished the returns for one or more previous 
tax periods or has not furnished the details of outward supplies under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 for the 
said tax period .] 
2[(11) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish a return for a tax period after the expiry of a 
period of three years from the due date of furnishing the said return:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by  notification, subject 
to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein,  allow a registered person or a class of 
registered persons to furnish the return for a tax  period, even after the expiry of the said period of three 
years from the due date of  furnishing the said return. ]

40. First return. —Every registered person who has made outward supplies in the period between the 
date on which he became liable to registration till the date on which registration has been granted shall 
declare the same in the first return furnished by him after grant of registration.  
3[41. Availment of input tax credit .—(1) Every registered person shall, subject to such conditions 
and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled to avail the credit of eligible input tax, as self -assessed, 
in his return and such amount shall be credited to his electronic credit ledger.  
(2) The credit of input tax availed by a registered person under sub -section ( 1) in respect of such 
supplies of goods or services or both, the tax payable whereon has not been paid by the supplier, shall be 
reversed along with applicable interest, by the said person in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where the said supplier makes payment of the tax payable in respect of the aforesaid 
supplies, the said registered person may re -avail the amount of credit reversed by him in such manner as 
may be prescribed. ]

42. [Matching, reversal and reclaim of input tax credit ].— Omitted by the Finance Act , 2022 (6 of 
2022), s. 107 ( w.e.f . 1-10-2022).

43. [Matching, reversal and reclaim of reduction in output tax liability ].—Omitted by s.  107, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  1-10-2022).   
43A. [Procedure for furnishing return and availing input tax credit ].—Omitted by s.  107, ibid.  
(w.e.f.  1-10-2022). 
4[44. Annual return. —5[(1)]  Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor, a 
person paying tax under section 51 or section 52, a casual taxable person and a non -resident taxable 
person shall furnish an annual return which may include a self -certified reconciliation statement, 
reconciling the value of supplies declared in the return furnished for the financial year, with the audited 
annual financial statement for every financial year electronically, within such time and in such form and 
in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Commissioner may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, 
exempt any class of registered persons from filing annual return under this section:

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 105, for “has not been furnished by him” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

2. Ins. by Act 8 of 2023, s. 143 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

3. Subs. by Act 6 of 2022, s. 106, for  section 41 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 111, for section 44 (w.e.f. 1 -8-2021).

5. Section 44 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 8 of 2023, s. 144 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).  
50 
 Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any department of the Central 
Government or a State Government or a local authority, whose books of account are subject to audit by 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or an auditor appointed for auditing the accounts of local 
authorities under any law for the time being in force .] 
1[(2) A registered person shall not be allowed to furnish an annual return under sub -section ( 1) for a 
financial year after the expiry of a period of three years from the due date of furnishing the said annual 
return:  
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, and 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, allow a registered person or a class 
of registered persons to furnish an annual return for a financial year under sub -section ( 1), even after the 
expiry of the said period of three years from the due date of furnishing the said annual return.]

45. Final return. —Every registered person who is required to furnish a return under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 39 and whose registration has been cancelled shall furnish a final return within three months of 
the date of cancellation or date of order of cancellation, whichever is later, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed.

46. Notice to return defaulters. —Where a registered person fails to furnish a return under                  
section 39 or section 44 or section 45, a notice shall be issued requiring him to furnish such return within 
fifteen days in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

47. Levy of late fee. —(1) Any registered person who fails to furnish the details of outward 2*** 
supplies required under section 37 3*** or returns required under section 39 or  section 45 4[or                 
section 52] by the due date shall pay a late fee of one hundred rupees for every day during which such 
failure continues subject to a maximum amount of five thousand rupees.  
(2) Any registered person who fails to furnish the return required under section 44 by the due date 
shall be liable to pay a late fee of one hundred rupees for every day during which such failure continues 
subject to a maximum of an amount calculated at a quarter per cent. of his turnover in the State or Union 
territory.

48. Goods and services tax practitioners. —(1) The manner of approval of goods and services tax 
practitioners, their eligibility conditions, duties and obligations, manner of removal and other conditions 
relevant for their functioning shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) A registered person may authorise an approved goods and services tax practitioner to furnish the 
details of outward supplies under section 37, 5*** and the return under section 39 or section 44 or                  
section 45 6[and to perform such other functions] in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the responsibility for correctness of any 
particulars furnished in the return or other details filed by the goods and services tax practitioners shall 
continue to rest with the registered person on whose behalf such return and details are furnished.  
CHAPTER X  
PAYMENT OF TAX

49. Payment of tax, interest, penalty and other amounts .—(1) Every deposit made towards tax, 
interest, penalty, fee or any other amount by a person by internet banking or by using credit or debit cards 
or National Electronic Fund Transfer or Real Time Gross Settlement or by such other mode and subject to 
such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, shall be credited to the electronic cash ledger of 
such person to be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.

1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2023 , s. 144 , (w.e.f. 1 -10-2023).

2. The words “or inward” omitted by Act 6 of 2022, s. 108 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

3. The words “or section 38” omitted by s. 108, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

4. Ins. by s. 108, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

5. The words “ , the details of inward supplies under section 38” omitted by s. 109,  ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).

6. Ins. by Act 31 of 2018, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).  
51 
 (2) The input tax credit as self -assessed in the return of a registered person shall be credited to his 
electronic credit ledger, in accordance with  1[section 41  2***] to be maintained in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The amount available in the electronic cash ledger may be used for making any payment towards 
tax, interest, penalty, fees or any other amount payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder in such manner and subject to such conditions and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(4) The amount available in the electronic credit ledger may be used for making any payment towards 
output tax under this Act or under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act in such manner and subject to 
such conditions  3[and restrictions]  and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(5) The amount of input tax credit available in the electronic credit ledger of the registered person on 
account of –– 
(a) integrated tax shall first be utilised towards payment of integrated tax and the amount 
remaining, if any, may be utilised  towards the payment of central tax and State tax, or as the case may 
be, Union territory tax, in that order;  
(b) the central tax shall first be utilised towards payment of central tax and the amount remaining, if 
any, may be utilised towards the payment of integrated tax;  
(c) the State tax shall first be utilised towards payment of State tax and the amount remaining, if 
any, may be utilised towards payment of integrated tax;  
4[Provided that the input tax credit on account of State tax shall be utilised towards payment of 
integrated tax only where the balance of the input tax credit on account of central tax is not available 
for payment of integrated tax;]  
(d) the Union territory tax shall first be utilised  towards payment of Union territory tax and the amount 
remaining, if any, may be utilised towards payment of integrated tax;  
4[Provided that the input tax credit on account of Union territory tax shall be utilised towards 
payment of integrated tax only where the balance of the input tax credit on account of central tax is 
not available for payment of integrated tax;]  
 (e) the central tax shall not be utilised towards payment of State tax or Union territory tax; and  
(f) the State tax or Union territory tax shall not be utilised towards payment of central tax.  
(6) The balance in the electronic cash ledger or electronic credit ledger after payment of tax, interest, 
penalty, fee or any other amount payable under this Act or the rules made thereunder may be refunded in 
accordance with the provisions of section 54.  
(7) All liabilities of a taxable person under this Act shall be recorded and maintained in an electronic 
liability register in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(8) Every taxable person shall discharge his tax and other dues under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder in the following order, namely: –– 
(a) self -assessed tax, and other dues related to returns of previous tax periods;  
(b) self -assessed tax, and other dues related to the return of the current tax period;

1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2018 , s. 20, for “section 41” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2019).

2. The words “or section 43A” omitted by Act 6 of 2022, s. 110 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2022).