65. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Period for which tonnage tax option to remain in force.

115VQ.  (1) An option for tonnage tax scheme, after it has been approved under sub-section (3) of section
115VP, shall remain in force for a period of ten years from the date on which such option has been exercised
and shall be taken into account from the assessment year  relevant to the previous year in which such option
is exercised.
(2) An option for tonnage tax scheme shall cease to have effect from the assessment year relevant to the
previous year in which—
(a) the qualifying company ceases to be a qualifying company;
(b) a default is made in complying with the provisions contained in section 115VT or section 115VU or
section 115VV ;
(c) the tonnage tax company is excluded from the tonnage tax scheme under section 115VZC;
(d) the qualifying company furnishes to the Assessing Of ficer, a declaration in writing to the effect that
the provisions of this Chapter may not be made applicable to it,
and the profits and gains of the company from the business of operating qualifying ships shall be computed
in accordance with the other provisions of this Act.
Renewal of tonnage tax scheme.

115VR.  (1) An option for tonnage tax scheme approved under sub-section (3) of section 115VP may be
renewed within one year from the end of the previous year in which the option ceases to have effect.
(2) The provisions of sections 115VP and 115VQ shall apply in relation to a renewal of the option for
tonnage tax scheme in the same manner as they apply in relation to the approval of option for tonnage tax
scheme.
Prohibition to opt for tonnage tax scheme in certain cases.

115VS.  A qualifying company, which, on its own, opts out  of the tonnage tax scheme or makes a default in
complying with the provisions of section 115VT or section 115VU or section 115VV or whose option has
been excluded from tonnage tax scheme in pursuance of an order made under sub-section (1) of section115VZC, shall not be eligible to opt for tonnage tax scheme for a period of ten years from the date of opting
out or default or order, as the case may be.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
509 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
D.—Conditions for applicability of tonnage tax scheme
T ransfer of profits to Tonnage T ax Reserve Account.

115VT.  (1) A tonnage tax company shall, subject to and in accordance with the provisions of this section, be
required to credit to a reserve account (hereafter in this section referred to as the Tonnage Tax ReserveAccount) an amount not less than twenty per cent of the book profit derived from the activities referred to in
clauses ( i) and ( ii) of sub-section (1) of section 115V-I in each previous year to be utilised in the manner laid
down in sub-section (3):
Provided that a tonnage tax company may transfer a sum in excess of twenty per cent of the book profit and
such excess sum transferred shall also be utilised in the manner laid down in sub-section (3).
Explanation. —For  the  purposes of  this section,  "book  profit"  shall have  the  same  meaning as in  the
Explanation to sub-section (2) of section 115JB so far as it relates to the income derived from the activities
referred to in clauses ( i) and ( ii) of sub-section (1) of section 115V -I.
(2) Where the company has book profit from the busines s of operating qualifying ships and book loss from
any other sources, and consequently, the company is not in a position to create the full or any part of the
reserves under sub-section (1), the company shall create the reserves to the extent possible in that previous
year and the shortfall, if any, shall be added to the amount of the reserves required to be created for thefollowing previous year and such shortfall shall be de emed to be part of the reserve requirement of that
following previous year :
Provided that to the extent the shortfall in creation of re serves during a particular previous year is carried
forward to the following previous year under this sub- section, the company shall be considered as having
created sufficient reserves for the first mentioned previous year:
Provided further that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply in respect of the second year in case
the shortfall in creation of reserves continues for two consecutive previous years.
(3) The amount credited to the Tonnage Tax Reserve Account under sub-section (1) shall be ut ilised by the
company before the expiry of a period of eight years next following the previous year in which the amountwas credited—
(a)for acquiring a new ship 
66[or new inland vessel, as the case may be ], for the purposes of the
business of the company; and
(b)until the acquisition of a new ship 66[or new inland vessel, as the case may be ], for the purposes of
the business of operating qualifying ships other than for distribution by way of dividends or profitsor for remittance outside India as profits or for the creation of any asset outside India.
(4) Where any amount credited to the Tonnage Tax Reserve Account under sub-section (1),—
(a) has  been  utilised  for  any  purpose  other  than  that  referred  to  in  clause  ( a)  or  clause  ( b) o f
sub-section (3); or
(b) has not been utilised for the purpose specified in clause ( a) of sub-section (3); or
(c)has  been  utilised  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  a  new  ship  
67[as  specified  in  clause  ( a) o f
sub-section  (3),  but  such  ship ]is sold  or  otherwise  transferred,  other  than  in  any  scheme  of
demerger by the company to any person at any time  before the expiry of three years from the end
of the previous year in which it was acquired,
an amount which bears the same proportion to the total relevant shipping income of the year in which such
reserve was created, as the amount out of such reserve so ut ilised or not utilised bears to the total reserve
created during that year under sub-section (1) shall be taxable under the other provisions of this Act—
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), in the year in which the amount was so ut ilised; or
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), in the  year immediately following the period of eight  years
specified in sub-section (3); orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
510 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iii) in a case referred to in clause ( c), in the year in which the sale or transfer took place:
Provided that  the  income  so  taxable  under  the  other  provisions  of  this  Act  shall be  reduced  by  the
proportionate tonnage income charged to tax in the year of creation of such reserves.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Chapter, where the amount credited to
the Tonnage Tax Reserve Account in accordance with sub-section (1) is less than the minimum amountrequired to be credited under sub-section (1), an amount which bears the same proportion to the total
relevant shipping income, as the shortfall in credit to the reserves bears to the minimum reserve required to
be credited under sub-section (1) shall not be taxabl e under the tonnage tax scheme and shall be taxable
under the other provisions of this Act.
(6) If the reserve required to be created under sub- section (1) is not created for any two consecutive
previous years, the option of the company for tonnage  tax scheme shall cease to have effect from the
beginning of the previous year following the second c onsecutive previous year in which the failure to create
the reserve under sub-section (1) had occurred.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this 
68[section, "new ship" includes ] a qualifying ship which, before the
date of acquisition by the qualifying company was used by any other person, if it was not at any time
previous to the date of such acquisition owned by any person resident in India.

66. Italicised words shall be Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.

67. Words "or new inland vessel, as the case may be, as specified in clause ( a) of sub-section (3), but
such ship or inland vessel, as the  case  may be,"  shall be  Sub. for "as specified in clause  ( a) o f
sub-section (3), but such ship", by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.

68. Words 'section, "new ship or new inland vessel" , as the case may be, includes' shall be Sub. for
'section, "new ship" includes' by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.
Minimum training requirement for tonnage tax company.

115VU.  (1) A tonnage tax company, after its option has been approved under sub-section (3) of section
115VP, shall comply with the minimum training requirement in respect of trainee officers in accordance withthe guidelines framed by the Director-General of Shippi ng and notified in the Official Gazette by the Central
Government.
(2) The tonnage tax company shall be required to furnish a copy of the certificate issued by the Director-
General of Shipping along with the return of income under section 139 to the effect that such company has
complied with the minimum training requirement in accordance with the guidelines referred to in sub-section
(1) for the previous year.
(3) If the minimum training requirement is not complied with for any five consecutive previous years, the
option of the company for tonnage tax scheme shall cease to have effect from the beginning of the previousyear following the fifth consecutive previous year in which the failure to comply with the minimum training
requirement under sub-section (1) had occurred.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
511 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Limit for charter in of tonna ge.
115VV .  (1) In the case of every company which has opted for tonnage tax scheme, not more than forty-nine
per cent of the net tonnage of the qualifying ships operated by it during any previous year shall be charteredin.
(2) The proportion of net tonnage referred to in sub- section (1) in respect of a previous year shall be
calculated based on the average of net tonnage during that previous year.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), the average of net tonnage shall be computed in such manner as may
be prescribed in consultation with the Director-General of Shipping.
(4) Where the net tonnage of ships 
69[or inland vessels, as the case may be, ] chartered in exceeds the limit
under sub-section (1) during any previous year, the total income of such company in relation to that previous
year shall be computed as if the option for tonnage tax scheme does not have effect for that previous year.
(5) Where the limit under sub-section (1) had exceeded in any two consecutive previous years, the option
for tonnage tax scheme shall cease to have effect fro m the beginning of the previous year following the
second consecutive previous year in which the limit had exceeded.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the term "chartered in" shall exclude a ship 69[or inland
vessel, as the case may be, ] chartered in by the company on bareboat charter- cum-demise terms.

69. Italicised words shall be Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.
Maintenance and audit of accounts.
115VW .  An option for tonnage tax scheme by a tonnage tax company shall not have effect in relation to a
previous year unless such company—
(i) maintains separate books of account in respect of the business of operating qualifying ships; and
(ii) furnishes, before the specified date referred to in section 44AB, the report of an accountant, in the
prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant.
Explanation. —For  the  purposes of  this section,  "accountant"  shall have  the  same  meaning as in  the
Explanation  below sub-section (2) of section 288.
Determination of tonnage.

115VX.  (1) For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a)the tonnage of a ship 69[or inland vessel, as the case may be, ] shall be determined in accordance
with the valid certificate indicating its tonnage;
(b) "valid certificate" means,—
(i) in case of ships registered in India—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
512 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) having a length of less than twenty-four metres, a certificate issued under the
Merchant Shipping (Tonnage Measurement of Ship) Rules, 1987 made under theMerchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958);
(b) having  a  length  of  twenty-four  metres  or  more,  an  international  tonnage
certificate  issued  under  the  provisions  of  the  Convention  on  TonnageMeasurement of Ships, 1969, as specified in the Merchant Shipping (Tonnage
Measurement of Ship) Rules, 1987 made under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958
(44 of 1958);
(ii) in case  of ships registered outside  India, a  licence  issued by the  Director-General of
Shipping under section 406 or section 407 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of
1958) specifying the net tonnage on the basis of Tonnage Certificate issued by the FlagState Administration where the ship is registered or any other evidence acceptable to the
Director-General of Shipping produced by the ship owner while seeking permission for
chartering in the ship.
Following sub-clause ( iii) shall be inserted after sub-clause ( ii) of sub-section (1)( b) of
section 115VX by the Finance Act, 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026:
(iii)in case of inland vessel registered in India, a certificate issued under the Inland Vessels
Act, 2021 (24 of 2021).

69. Italicised words shall be Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.
E.—Amalgamation and demerger of shipping companies
Amalgamation.

115VY.  Where there has been an amalgamation of a company with another company or companies, then,
subject to the other provisions of this section, the provi sions relating to the tonnage tax scheme shall, as far
as may be, apply to the amalgamated company if it is a qualifying company:
Provided that where the amalgamated company is not a tonnage tax company, it shall exercise an option for
tonnage tax scheme under sub-section (1) of section 115VP  within three months from the date of the
approval of the scheme of amalgamation:
Provided further that where the amalgamating companies are tonnage tax companies, the provisions of this
Chapter shall, as far as may be, apply to the amalga mated company for such period as the option for tonnage
tax scheme which has the longest unexpired period continues to be in force:
Provided also that where one of the amalgamating companies is a qualifying company as on the 1st day of
October, 2004 and which has not exercised the option for tonnage tax scheme within the initial period, the
provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the amalgamated company and the income of the amalgamated
company from the business of operating qualifying ships shall be computed in accordance with the otherprovisions of this Act.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
513 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Demerger.

115VZ.  Where  in  a  scheme  of  demerger,  the  demerged  company  transfers its business to  the  resulting
company before the expiry of the option for tonnage ta x scheme, then, subject to the other provisions of this
Chapter, the tonnage tax scheme shall, as far as ma y be, apply to the resulting company for the unexpired
period if it is a qualifying company:
Provided that the option for tonnage tax scheme in respect of the demerged company shall remain in force
for the unexpired period of the tonnage tax scheme if it continues to be a qualifying company.
F.—Miscellaneous
Effect of temporarily ceasing to operate qualifying ships.

115VZA.  (1) A temporary cessation (as against permanent cessation) of operating any qualifying ship by a
company shall not be considered as a cessation of ope rating of such qualifying ship and the company shall
be deemed to be operating such qualifying ship for the purposes of this Chapter.
(2) Where a qualifying company continues to operate a ship, 70[or inland vessel, as the case may be, ] which
temporarily ceases to be a qualifying ship, such ship 70[or inland vessel, as the case may be, ] shall not be
considered as a qualifying ship for the purposes of this Chapter.

70. Italicised words shall be Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.
G.—Provisions of this Chapter not to apply in certain cases
Avoidance of tax.

115VZB.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the tonnage tax scheme shall not apply where a
tonnage tax company is a party to any transaction or arrangement which amounts to an abuse of the tonnagetax scheme.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a transaction or arrangement shall be considered an abuse if the
entering into or the application of such transaction or  arrangement results, or would but for this section have
resulted, in a tax advantage being obtained for—
(i) a person other than a tonnage tax company; or
(ii) a tonnage tax company in respect of its non-tonnage tax activities.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, "tax advantage" include,—
(i) the determination of the allowance for any expense or interest, or the determination of any cost orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
514 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
expense allocated or apportioned, or, as the case may be, which has the effect of reducing the
income or increasing the loss, as the case may be, from activities other than tonnage tax activitieschargeable to tax, computed on the basis of entr ies made in the books of account in respect of the
previous year in which the transaction was entered into; or
(ii) a transaction or arrangement which produces to the tonnage tax company more than ordinary
profits which might be expected to arise from tonnage tax activities.
Exclusion from tonnage tax scheme.

115VZC.  (1) Where a tonnage tax company is a party to any transaction or arrangement referred to in
sub-section  (1)  of  section  115VZB,  the  Assessing Officer  shall,  by  an  order  in  writing,  exclude  suchcompany from the tonnage tax scheme:
Provided that an opportunity shall be given by the Assessing Officer by serving a notice ca lling upon such
company to show cause, on a date and time to be sp ecified in the notice, why it should not be excluded from
the tonnage tax scheme:
Provided further that no order under this sub-section shall be  passed without the previous approval of the
Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply where the company shows to the satisfaction of the
Assessing Officer that the transaction or arrangement was a bona fide commercial transaction and had not
been entered into for the purpose of obtaining tax advantage under this Chapter.
(3) Where an order has been passed under sub-sectio n (1) by the Assessing Officer excluding the tonnage
tax company from the tonnage tax scheme, the option for tonnage tax scheme shall cease to be in force from
the first day of the previous year in which the transaction or arrangement was entered into.
CHAPTER XII-H
INCOME-TAX ON FRINGE BENEFITS
A.—Meaning of certain expressions
Definitions.
115W .  In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "employer" means,—
(i) a company;
(ii) a firm;
(iii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not;
(iv) a local authority; and
(v) every artificial juridical person, not fa lling within any of the preceding sub-clauses:
Provided that any person eligible for exemption under clause ( 23C) of section 10 or
registered under section 12AA or a political party registered under section 29A of the
Representation of the  People  Act, 1951 (4 3 of 1951) shall not  be  deemed to be  an
employer for the purposes of this Chapter;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
515 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) "fringe benefit tax" or "tax" means the tax chargeable under section 115WA.
B.—Basis of charge
Charge of fringe benefit tax.
115W A.  (1)  In  addition  to  the  income-tax  charged  under  this  Act,  there  shall be  charged  for  every
assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2006, additional income-tax (in this Act
referred to as fringe benefit tax) in respect of the fr inge benefits provided or deemed to have been provided
by an employer to his employees during the previous year at the rate of thirty per cent on the value of suchfringe benefits.
(2)  Notwithstanding that  no  income-tax  is payable  by  an  employer  on  his total income  computed  in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the tax on fringe benefits shall be payable by such employer.
Fringe benefits.

115WB.  (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, "fringe benefits" means any consideration for employment
provided by way of—
(a) any privilege, service, facility or amenity, directly or indirectly, provided by an employer, whether
by  way  of  reimbursement  or  otherwise,  to  his  employees  (including  former  employee  or
employees);
(b) any free or concessional ticket provided by the employer for private journeys of his employees or
their family members;
(c) any contribution by the employer to an approved superannuation fund for employees ; and
(d) any specified security or sweat equity shares allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by the
employer free of cost or at concessional rate to his employees (including former employee or
employees).
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) "specified security" means the securities as defined in clause ( h) of s ecti on 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and, where employees' stockoption has been granted under any plan or scheme therefor, includes the securities offered
under such plan or scheme;
(ii) "sweat  equity shares"  means equity shares issued by a  company to its employees or
directors at a discount or for consideratio n other than cash for providing know-how or
making available rights in the nature of intellectual property rights or value additions, by
whatever name called.
(2) The fringe benefits shall be deemed to have been provided by the employer to his employees, if the
employer has, in the course of his business or professi on (including any activity whether or not such activity
is carried on with the object of deriving income, profits or gains) incurred any expense on, or made any
payment for, the following purposes, namely:—
(A) entertainment;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
516 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(B) provision of hospitality of every kind by the employer to any person, whether by way of provision
of food or beverages or in any other manner whatsoever and whether or not such provision is madeby reason of any express or implied contract or custom or usage of trade but does not include—
(i) any expenditure on, or payment for, food or beverages provided by the employer to his
employees in office or factory;
(ii) any expenditure on or payment through paid vouchers which are not transferable and
usable only at eating joints or outlets;
(iii) any expenditure on or payment through non-transferable pre-paid electronic meal card
usable only at eating joints or outlets and which fulfils such other conditions as may be
prescribed;
(C) conference (other than fee for participation by the employees in any conference).
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, any expenditure on conveyance, tour and travel
(including foreign travel), on hotel, or boarding and lodging in connection with any conference
shall be deemed to be expenditure incurred for the purposes of conference;
(D) sales promotion including publicity:
Provided that any expenditure on advertisement,—
(i) being the  expenditure  (including rental)  on  advertisement  of  any  form  in  any  print
(including journals, catalogues or price lists) or electronic media or transport system;
(ii) being the expenditure on the holding of, or the participation in, any press conference or
business convention, fair or exhibition;
(iii) being the expenditure on sponsorship of any sports event or any other event organised by
any Government agency or trade association or body;
(iv) being the expenditure on the publication in any print or electronic media of any notice
required to be published by or under any law or by an order of a court or tribunal;
(v) being the  expenditure  on advertisement by way of signs, art work, painting, banners,
awnings,  direct  mail,  electric  spectaculars,  kiosks,  hoardings,  bill  boards,  display  ofproducts or by way of such other medium of advertisement;
(vi) being the expenditure by way of payment to any advertising agency for the purposes of
clauses ( i) to ( v) above;
(vii) being the expenditure on distribution of samples either free of cost or at concessional rate;
and
(viii) being the expenditure by way of payment to any person of repute for promoting the sale of
goods or services of the business of the employer,
shall not be considered as expenditure on sales promotion including publicity;
(E) employees' welfare.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, any expenditure incurred or payment made to—
(i) fulfil any statutory obligation; or
(ii) mitigate occupational hazards; or
(iii) provide first aid facilities in the hospital or dispensary run by the employer; or
(iv) provide creche facility for the children of the employee; or
(v) sponsor a sportsman, being an employee; or
(vi) organise sports events for employees,
shall not be considered as expenditure for employees' welfare;
(F) conveyanceINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
517 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(G) use of hotel, boarding and lodging facilities;
(H) repair, running (including fuel), maintenance of motor cars and the amount of depreciation thereon;
(I) repair,  running (including fuel)  and  maintenance  of  aircrafts and  the  amount  of  depreciation
thereon;
(J) use of telephone (including mobile phone) other than expenditure on leased telephone lines;
(K) [***]
(L) festival celebrations;
(M) use of health club and similar facilities;
(N) use of any other club facilities;
(O)g i f t s ;  a n d
(P) scholarships;
(Q) tour and travel (including foreign travel).
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the privilege, service, facility or amenity does not include perquisites
in respect of which tax is paid or payable by the empl oyee or any benefit or amenity in the nature of free or
subsidised transport or any such allowance provided by the employer to his employees for journeys by the
employees from their residence to the place of work or such place of work to the place of residence.
Value of fringe benefits.

115WC.  (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the value of fringe benefits shall be the aggregate of the
following, namely:—
(a) cost at which the benefits referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 115WB, is provided
by the employer to the general public as reduced by the amount, if any, paid by, or recovered from,his employee or employees:
Provided that in a case where the expenses of the nature referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1)
of section 115WB are included in any other clause of sub-section (2) of the said section, the totalexpenses included under such other clause shall be reduced by the amount of expenditure referred
to in the said clause ( b) for computing the value of fringe benefits;
(b) the amount of contribution, referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of section 115WB, which
exceeds one lakh rupees in respect of each employee;
(ba) the fair market value of the specified security or sweat equity shares referred to in clause ( d) of
sub-section (1) of section 115WB, on the date on which the option vests with the employee asreduced by the amount actually paid by, or recovered from, the employee in respect of such
security or shares.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) "fair market value" means the value determined in accordance with the method as may be
prescribed by the Board;
(ii) "option" means a right but not an obligation granted to an employee to apply for the
specified security or sweat equity shares at a predetermined price;
(c) twenty per cent of the expenses referred to in clauses ( A) to ( L) of sub-section (2) of section
115WB;
(d) fifty per cent of the expenses referred to in clauses ( M) to ( P)of sub-section (2) of section 115WB;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
518 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(e) five per cent of the expenses referred to in clause ( Q) of sub-section (2) of section 115WB.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),—
(a) in the case of an employer engaged in the business of hotel, the value of fringe benefits for the
purposes referred to in clause ( B)of sub-section (2) of section 115WB shall be "five per cent"
instead of "twenty per cent" referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section (1);
(aa) in the case of an employer engaged in the business of carriage of passengers or goods by aircraft,
the value of fringe benefits for the purposes referred to in clause ( B) of sub-section (2) of section
115WB shall be "five per cent" instead of "twenty per cent" referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section
(1);
(ab) in the case of an employer engaged in the business of carriage of passengers or goods by ship, the
value of fringe benefits for the purposes referred to in clause ( B) of sub-section (2) of section
115WB shall be "five per cent" instead of "twenty per cent" referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section
(1);
(b) in the case of an employer engaged in the business of construction, the value of fringe benefits for
the purposes referred to in clause ( F) of sub-section (2) of section 115WB shall be "five per cent"
instead of "twenty per cent" referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section (1);
(c) in  the  case  of  an  employer  engaged  in  th e  business  of  manufacture  or  production  of
pharmaceuticals, the value of fringe benefits for the purposes referred to in clauses ( F) and ( G) of
sub-section (2) of section 115WB shall be "five per cent" instead of "twenty per cent" referred to
in clause ( c) of sub-section (1);
(d) in the case of an employer engaged in the bus iness of manufacture or production of computer
software, the  value  of fringe  benefits for the  purposes referred to in clauses ( F) and ( G) o f
sub-section (2) of section 115WB shall be "five per cent" instead of "twenty per cent" referred to
in clause ( c) of sub-section (1);
(da) in the case of an employer engaged in the business of carriage of passengers or goods by aircraft,
the value of fringe benefits for the purposes referred to in clause ( G) of sub-section (2) of section
115WB shall be "five per cent" instead of "twenty per cent" referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section
(1);
(db) in the case of an employer engaged in the business of carriage of passengers or goods by ship, the
value of fringe benefits for the purposes referred to in clause ( G) of sub-section (2) of section
115WB shall be "five per cent" instead of "twenty per cent" referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section
(1);
(e) in the case of an employer engaged in the busines s of carriage of passengers or goods by motor car,
the value of fringe benefits for the purposes referred to in clause ( H) of sub-section (2) of section
115WB shall be "five per cent" instead of "twenty per cent" referred to in clause ( c) of sub-section
(1);
(f) in the case of an employer engaged in the business of carriage of passengers or goods by aircraft,
the value of fringe benefits for the purposes referred to in clause ( I) of sub-section (2) of section
115WB shall be taken as Nil.
C.—Procedure for filing of return in respect of fringe benefits, assessment and payment of tax in respect
thereof
Return of fringe benefits.

115WD.  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contai ned in section 139, every employer who during aINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
519 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
previous year has paid or made provision for payment of fringe benefits to his employees, shall, on or before
the due date, furnish or cause to be furnished a return  of fringe benefits to the Assessing Officer in the
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be
prescribed, in respect of the previous year.
Explanation. —In this sub-section, "due date" means,—
(a) where the employer is—
(i) a company; or
(ii) a person (other than a company) whose accounts are required to be audited under this Act
or under any other law for the time being in force,
the 30th day of September of the assessment year;
(b) in the case of any other employer, the 31st day of July of the assessment year.
(2) In the case of any employer who, in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, is responsible for paying fringe
benefit tax under this Act and who has not furnished a return under sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer
may, after the due date, issue a notice to him and serv e the same upon him, requiring him to furnish within
thirty days from the date of service of the notice, th e return in the prescribed form and verified in the
prescribed manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) Any employer responsible for paying fringe benefit tax who has not furnished a return within the time
allowed under sub-section (1) or within the time allowed under a notice issued under sub-section (2), may
furnish the return for any previous year, at any time before the expiry of one year from the end of the
relevant assessment year or before the completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier.
(4) If any employer, having furnished a return under sub- section (1), or in pursuance of a notice issued under
sub-section (2), discovers any omission or any wrong statement therein, he may furnish a revised return at
any  time  before  the  expiry  of  one  year  from the  en d  of  the  relevant  assessment  year  or  before  the
completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier.
Assessment.

115WE.  (1) Where a return has been made under section 115WD, such return shall be processed in the
following manner, namely:—
(a) the value of fringe benefits shall be computed after making the following adjustments, namely:—
(i) any arithmetical error in the return; or
(ii) an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any information in the return;
(b) the tax and interest, if any, shall be computed on  the basis of the value of fringe benefits computed
under clause ( a);
(c) the  sum payable  by, or the  amount  of refund due  to, the  assessee  shall be  determined after
adjustment of the tax and interest, if any, computed under clause ( b) by any advance tax paid, any
tax paid on self-assessment and any amount paid otherwise by way of tax or interest;
(d) an intimation shall be prepared or generated and sent to the assessee specifying the sum determined
to be payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the assessee under clause ( c); and
(e) the amount of refund due to the assessee in pursuance of the determination under clause ( c) shall
be granted to the assessee:
Provided that no intimation under this sub-section shall be sent after the expiry of one year from the end of
the financial year in which the return is made.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
520 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the return" shall mean a claim, on the basis of
an entry, in the return,—
(i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same or some other item in such
return;
(ii) in respect of which the information required to be furnished to substantiate such entry has
not been so furnished under this Act; or
(iii) in respect  of a  deduction or value  of fringe  benefits, where  such deduction or value
exceeds specified statutory limit which may have been expressed as monetary am ount or
percentage or ratio or fraction;
(b) the acknowledgement of the return shall be deemed to be the intimation in a case where no sum is
payable by, or refundable to, the assessee under clause ( c), and where no adjustment has been
made under clause ( a).
(1A) For the purposes of processing of returns under sub-section (1), the Board may make a scheme for
centralised processing of returns with a view to expeditiously determining the tax payable by, or the refund
due to, the assessee as required under that sub-section.
(1B) Save as otherwise expressly provided, for the purpose of giving effect to the scheme made under
sub-section (1A), the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any of theprovisions of this Act relating to processing of retu rns shall not apply or shall apply with such exceptions,
modifications and adaptations as may be specified in that notification; so, however, that no direction shall be
issued after the 31st day of March, 2011.
(1C) Every notification issued under sub-section (1B), along with the scheme made under sub-section (1A),
shall, as soon as may be after the notification is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) Where a return has been furnished under section 115W D, the Assessing Officer shall, if he considers it
necessary or expedient to ensure that the assessee ha s not understated the value of fringe benefits or has not
underpaid the tax in any manner, serve on the assessee a notice requiring him on a date to be specifiedtherein, either to attend his office or to produce, or cause to be produced, any evidence on which the
assessee may rely in support of the return:
Provided  that no notice under this sub-section shall be served on the assessee after the expiry of six months
from the end of the financial year in which the return is furnished.
(3) On the day specified in the notice issued under sub-section (2), or as soon afterwards as may be, after
hearing such evidence as the assessee may produce and such other evidence as the Assessing Officer may
require on specified points, and after taking into account all relevant material which he has gathered, the
Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, make an  assessment of the value of the fringe benefits paid or
payable by the assessee, and determine the sum payable by him or refund of any amount due to him on the
basis of such assessment.
(4) Where a regular assessment under sub-section (3) or section 115WF is made,—
(a) any tax or interest paid by the assessee under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been paid
towards such regular assessment;
(b) if no refund is due on regular assessment or the amount refunded under sub-section (1) exceeds the
amount refundable on regular assessment, the whole or the excess amount so refunded shall be
deemed to be tax payable by the assessee and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
521 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Best judgment assessment .

115WF.  If any person, being an employer—
(a) fails to make the return required under sub-section (1) of section 115WD and has not made a return
under sub-section (3) or a revised return under sub-section (4) of that section, or
(b) fails to comply with all the terms of a notice issued under sub-section (2) of section 115WD or fails
to comply with a direction issued under sub-section (2A) of section 142, or
(c) having made a return, fails to comply with all the terms of a notice issued under sub-section (2) of
section 115WE,
the  Assessing Officer,  after  taking into  account  all relevant  material which  the  Assessing Officer  has
gathered, shall, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard, make the assessment of the fringebenefits to the best of his judgment and determine the sum payable by the assessee on the basis of such
assessment:
Provided  that such opportunity shall be given by the Assessing Officer by serving a notice ca lling upon the
assessee to show cause, on a date and time to be sp ecified in the notice as to why the assessment should not
be completed to the best of his judgment:
Provided further  that it shall not be necessary to give such opportunity in a case where a notice under
sub-section (2) of section 115WD has been issued prior to the making of an assessment under this section.
Fringe benefits escaping assessment.

115WG.  If the Assessing Officer has reason to believe that any fringe benefits chargeable to tax have
escaped assessment for any assessment year, he may, subject to the provisions of sections 115WH, 150 and
153, assess or reassess such fringe benefits and also any other fringe benefits chargeable to tax which have
escaped assessment and which come to his notice subse quently in the course of the proceedings under this
section, for the assessment year concerned (hereafter referred to as the relevant assessment year).
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the following shall also be deemed to be cases where fringe
benefits chargeable to tax have escaped assessment, namely:—
(a) where no return of fringe benefits has been furnished by the assessee;
(b) where a return of fringe benefits has been furnished by the assessee but no assessment has been
made and it is noticed by the Assessing Officer that the assessee has understated the value of fringe
benefits in the return;
(c) where an assessment has been made, but the fringe benefits chargeable to tax have been under-
assessed.
Issue of notice where fringe benefits have escaped assessment.

115WH.  (1) Before making the assessment or reassessment under section 115WG, the Assessing Officer
shall serve on the assessee a notice requiring him to furn ish within such period as may be specified in the
notice, a return of the fringe benefits in respect of which he is assessable under this Chapter during the
previous year corresponding to the relevant assessment year, in the prescribed form and verified in the
prescribed manner and setting forth such other particul ars as may be prescribed, and the provisions of thisINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
522 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly as if such return were a return required to be furnished
under section 115WD.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, before issuing any notice under this section, record his reasons for doing so.(3) No notice under sub-section (1) shall be issued for the relevant assessment year after the expiry of six
years from the end of the relevant assessment year.
Explanation.— In determining fringe benefits chargeable to tax which have  escaped assessment for the
purposes of this sub-section, the provisions of the Explanation to section 115WG shall apply as they apply
for the purposes of that section.
(4) In a case where an assessment under sub-section (3 ) of section 115WE or section 115WG has been made
for the relevant assessment year, no notice shall be issued under sub-section (1) by an Assessing Officer,
after the expiry of four years from the end of th e relevant assessment year, unless the Principal Chief
Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner is satisfied,  on the
reasons recorded by the Assessing Officer, that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice.
Payment of fringe benefit tax.

115WI.  Notwithstanding that the regular assessment in respect of any fringe benefits is to be made in a later
assessment year, the tax on such fringe benefits shall be payable in advance during any financial year, in
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section  115WJ,  in  respect  of  the  fringe  benefits  which  would  bechargeable to tax for the assessment year immediately following that financial year, such fringe benefits
being hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the "current fringe benefits".
Advance tax in respect of fringe benefits.

115WJ.  (1) Every assessee who is liable to pay advance tax under section 115WI, shall on his own accord,
pay advance tax on his current fringe benefits calculated in the manner laid down in sub-section (2).
(2) Advance tax on the current fringe benefits shall be payable by—
(a) all the companies, who are liable to pay the same in four instalments during each financial year and
the due date of each instalment and the amount of such instalment shall be as specified in Table I
below:
TABLE I
Due date of instalment Amount payable
On or before the 15th JuneNot less than fifteen per
cent of such advance tax.
On or before the 15th SeptemberNot less than forty-five per
cent of such advance taxas reduced by the amount,
if any, paid in the earlier
instalment.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
523 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
On or before the 15th DecemberNot less than seventy-five
per cent of such advance
tax as reduced by the
amount or amounts, if any,paid in the earlier
instalment or instalments.
On or before the 15th MarchThe whole amount of such
advance tax as reduced by
the amount or amounts, if
any, paid in the earlierinstalment or instalments;
(b) all the assessees (other than companies), who are liable to pay the same in three instalments during
each financial year and the due date of each instalment and the amount of such instalment shall be
as specified in Table II below :
TABLE II
Due date of instalment Amount payable
On or before the 15th SeptemberNot less than thirty per cent
of such advance tax.
On or before the 15th DecemberNot less than sixty per cent
of such advance tax asreduced by the amount, if
any, paid in the earlier
instalment.
On or before the 15th MarchThe whole amount of such
advance tax as reduced by
the amount or amounts, ifany, paid in the earlier
instalment or instalments.
(3) Where an assessee, being a company, has failed to pay the advance tax payable by him on or before the
due date for any instalment or where the advance ta x paid by him is less than the amount payable by the due
date, he shall be liable to pay simple interest calculated at the rate of—
(i) one per cent per month, for three months on an am ount by which the advance tax paid on or before
the 15th June of the financial year falls short of fifteen per cent of the advance tax payable;
(ii) one per cent per month, for three months on an am ount by which the advance tax paid on or before
the 15th September of the financial year falls s hort of forty-five per cent of the advance tax
payable;
(iii) one per cent per month, for three months on an am ount by which the advance tax paid on or before
the 15th December of the financial year falls short of seventy-five per cent of the advance tax
payable; and
(iv) one per cent on an amount by which the advanc e tax paid on or before the 15th March of the
financial year falls short of hundred per cent of the advance tax payable.
(4) Where an assessee, being a person other than a company, has failed to pay the advance tax payable by
him on or before the due date for any instalment or where the advance tax paid by him is less than the
amount payable by the due date, he shall be liable to pay simple interest calculated at the rate of—
(i) one per cent per month, for three months on an am ount by which the advance tax paid on or before
the 15th September of the financial year falls short of thirty per cent of the advance tax payable;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
524 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ii) one per cent per month, for three months on an am ount by which the advance tax paid on or before
the 15th December of the financial year falls s hort of sixty per cent of the advance tax payable;
and
(iii) one per cent on an amount by which the advanc e tax paid on or before the 15th March of the
financial year falls short of hundred per cent of the advance tax payable.
(5) Where an assessee has failed to pay the advance tax payable by him during a financial year or where the
advance tax paid by him is less than ninety per cent of the tax assessed under section 115WE or section115WF or section 115WG, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent per
month, for every month or part of a month comprised in  the period from the 1st day of April next following
such financial year to the date of assessment of tax under section 115WE or section 115WF or section115WG.
Interest for default in furnishing return of fringe benefits.

115WK.  (1) Where the return of fringe benefits for any assessment year under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(3) of section 115WD or in response to a notice under sub- section (2) of that section, is furnished after the
due date, or is not furnished, the employer shall be liable to  pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent for
every month or part of a month comprised in the period commencing on the date immediately following thedue date, and,—
(a) where the return is furnished after the due date, ending on the date of furnishing of the return; or
(b) where no return has been furnished, ending on the date of completion of the assessment under
section 115WF,
on the amount of the tax on the value of fringe benefits as determined under sub-section (1) of section
115WE or regular assessment as reduced by the advance tax paid under section 115WJ.
Explanation 1.— In this section, "due date" means the date specified in the Explanation to sub-section (1) of
section 115WD as applicable in the case of the employer.
Explanation 2.— Where, in relation to an assessment year, an assessment is made for the first time under
section 115WG, the assessment so made shall be regarded as a regular assessment for the purposes of this
section.
(2) The provisions contained in sub-sections (2) to (4) of section 234A shall, so far as may be, apply to this
section.
Recovery of fringe benefit tax by the employer from the employee.

115WKA.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any agreement or scheme under which any specified
security or sweat equity shares referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section (1) of section 115WB has been
allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by the employer on or after the 1st day of April, 2007, it shall
be lawful for the employer to vary the agreement or scheme under which such specified security or sweat
equity shares has been allotted or transferred so as to  recover from the employee the fringe benefit tax to the
extent to which such employer is liable to pay the fringe benefit tax in relation to the value of fringe benefits
provided to the employee and determined under clause ( ba) of sub-section (1) of section 115WC.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
525 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Deemed payment of tax by employee.

115WKB.  (1) Where an employer has paid any fringe benefit tax with respect to allotment or transfer of
specified security or sweat equity shares, referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section (1) of section 115WB, and
has recovered such tax subsequently from an employee,  it shall be deemed that the fringe benefit tax so
recovered is the tax paid by such employee in relation to the value of the fringe benefit provided to him only
to the  extent to which the amount thereof relates to the value of the  fringe  benefit provided to such
employee, as determined under clause ( ba) of sub-section (1) of section 115WC.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, where the fringe benefit tax
recovered from the employee is deemed to be the tax paid by such employee under sub-section (1), such
employee shall, under this Act, not be entitled to claim—
(i) any refund out of such payment of tax; or
(ii) any credit of such payment of tax against tax liability on other income or against any other tax
liability.
Application of other provisions of this Act.

115WL.  Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all ot her provisions of this Act shall, as far as may be,
apply in relation to fringe benefits also.
Chapter XII-H not to apply after a certain date.

115WM.  Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply, in respect of any assessment for the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 2010 or any subsequent assessment year.
CHAPTER XIII
INCOME-TAX AUTHORITIES
A.—Appointment and control
Income-tax authorities.

116. There shall be the following classes of income-tax authorities for the purposes of this Act, namely :—
(a) the Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 (54
of 1963),
(aa) Principal Directors General of Income-tax or Principal Chief Commissioners of Income-tax,
(b) Directors-General of Income-tax or Chief Commissioners of Income-tax,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
526 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(ba) Principal Directors of Income-tax or Principal Commissioners of Income-tax,
(c) Directors  of  Income-tax  or  Commissioners  of  Income-tax  or  Commissioners  of  Income-tax
(Appeals),
(cc) Additional Directors of Income-tax or Additional Commissioners of Income-tax or Additional
Commissioners of Income-tax (Appeals),
(cca)Joint Directors of Income-tax or Joint Commissioners of Income-tax 71[or Joint Commissioners of
Income-tax (Appeals)],
(d) Deputy  Directors  of  Income-tax  or  Deputy  Commissioners  of  Income-tax  or  Deputy
Commissioners of Income-tax (Appeals),
(e) Assistant Directors of Income-tax or Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax,
(f) Income-tax Officers,
(g) Tax Recovery Officers,
(h) Inspectors of Income-tax.

71. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Appointment of income-tax authorities.

117. (1) The Central Government may appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be income-tax authorities.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), and subject to the rules and orders of the Central
Government  regulating the  conditions of  service  of  persons in  public  services and  posts,  the  Central
Government may authorise the Board, or a Principal Director General or Director-General, a Principal Chief
Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or a Principal Director or Director or a Principal Commissioner orCommissioner to appoint income-tax authorities below the rank of an Assistant Co mmissioner or Deputy
Commissioner.
(3) Subject to the rules and orders of the Central Gove rnment regulating the conditions of service of persons
in public services and posts, an income-tax authority authorised in this behalf by the Board may appoint
such executive or ministerial staff as may be necessary to assist it in the execution of its functions.
Control of income-tax authorities.

118. The  Board  may,  by  notification  in  the  Official  Gazette,  direct  that  any  income-tax  authority  or
authorities specified in the notification shall be subordinate to such other income-tax authority or authorities
as may be specified in such notification.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
527 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Instructions to subordinate authorities .

119. (1) The Board may, from time to time, issue such or ders, instructions and directions to other income-tax
authorities as it may deem fit for the proper administration of this Act, and such authorities and all otherpersons employed in the  execution of this Act  shal l observe  and follow such orders, instructions and
directions of the Board :
Provided  that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be issued—
(a) so as to require any income-tax authority to make a particular assessment or to dispose of a
particular case in a particular manner; or
(b)so  as  to  interfere  with  the  discretion  of  
72-73[the  Joint  Commissioner  (Appeals)  or]  the
Commissioner (Appeals) in the exercise of his appellate functions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,—
(a) the Board may, if it considers it necessary or  expedient so to do, for the purpose of proper and
efficient management of the work of assessment and collection of revenue, issue, from time to time
(whether by way of relaxation of any of the provisions of sections 115P, 115S, 115WD, 115WE,
115WF,  115WG,  115WH,  115WJ,  115WK,  139,  143,  144,  147,  148,  154,  155,  158BFA,
sub-section (1A) of section 201, secti ons 210, 211, 234A, 234B, 234C, 234E, 234F, 270A, 271,
271C, 271CA and 273 or otherwise), general or specia l orders in respect of any class of incomes or
fringe benefits or class of cases, setting forth directions or instructions (not being prejudicial to
assessees)  as to  the  guidelines,  principles or  procedures to  be  followed  by  other  income-tax
authorities  in  the  work  relating  to  assessment  or  collection  of  revenue  or  the  initiation  ofproceedings for the imposition of penalties and any such order may, if the Board is of opinion that
it is necessary in the public interest so to do, be published and circulated in the prescribed manner
for general information;
(b) the Board may, if it considers it desirable or expedient so to do for avoiding genuine hardship in
any case or class of cases, by general or specia l order, authorise any income-tax authority, not
being 
72-73[a Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or] a Commissioner (Appeals)] to admit an application
or claim for any exemption, deduction, refund or any other relief under this Act after the expiry of
the period specified by or under this Act for making such application or claim and deal with thesame on merits in accordance with law;
(c) the Board may, if it considers it desirable or expedient so to do for avoiding genuine hardship in
any case or class of cases, by general or special order for reasons to be specified therein, relax any
requirement contained in any of the provisions of  Chapter IV or Chapter VI-A, where the assessee
has failed  to  comply  with  any  requirement  specified  in  such  provision  for  claiming deductionthereunder, subject to the following conditions, namely:—
(i) the default in complying with such requirement was due to circumstances beyond the
control of the assessee; and
(ii) the assessee has complied with such requirement before the completion of assessment in
relation to the previous year in which such deduction is claimed :
Provided  that the Central Government shall cause every order issued under this clause to
be laid before each House of Parliament.
(3) [***]
72-73.  Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
528 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
T axpayer's Charter.

119A.  The Board shall adopt and declare a Taxpayer's Charter and issue such orders, instructions, directions
or guidelines to other income-tax authorities as it may deem fit for the administration of such Charter.
B.—Jurisdiction
Jurisdiction of income-tax authorities.

120. (1) Income-tax authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and perform all or any of the functions
conferred on, or, as the case may be, assigned to such authorities by or under this Act in accordance withsuch directions as the Board may issue for the exercise of the powers and performance of the functions by
all or any of those authorities.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any income-tax authority, being an
authority higher in rank, may, if so directed by th e Board, exercise the powers and perform the functions of
the income-tax authority lower in rank and any such direction issued by the Board shall be deemed to be a
direction issued under sub-section (1).
(2) The directions of the Board under sub-section (1) ma y authorise any other income-tax authority to issue
orders in writing for the exercise of the powers and pe rformance of the functions by all or any of the other
income-tax authorities who are subordinate to it.
(3) In issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2), the Board or other income-tax
authority authorised by it may have regard to any one or more of the following criteria, namely :—
(a) territorial area;
(b) persons or classes of persons;
(c) incomes or classes of income; and
(d) cases or classes of cases.
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections  (1) and (2), the Board may, by general or special
order, and subject to such conditions, restrictions or limitations as may be specified therein,—
(a) authorise any Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Director or Director to
perform such functions of any other income-tax authority as may be assigned to him by the Board;
(b) empower the Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Chief Commissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner to issue orders in writing that thepowers and functions conferred on, or as the case may be, assigned to, the Assessing Officer by or
under this Act in respect of any specified area or persons or classes of persons or incomes or
classes of income or cases or classes of cases, shall be exercised or performed by an AdditionalCommissioner or an Additional Director or a Joint Commissioner or a Joint Director, and, where
any order is made under this clause, references in any other provision of this Act, or in any rule
made thereunder to the Assessing Officer shall be deemed to be references to such AdditionalCommissioner or Additional Director or Joint Commissioner or Joint Director by whom the powers
and functions are to be exercised or performed under such order, and any provision of this Act
requiring approval or sanction of the Joint Commissioner shall not apply.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
529 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(5) The directions and orders referred to in sub-sect ions (1) and (2) may, wherever considered necessary or
appropriate for the proper management of the work, requi re two or more Assessing Officers (whether or not
of the same class) to exercise and perform, concurre ntly, the powers and functions in respect of any area or
persons or classes of persons or incomes or classes of income or cases or classes of cases; and, where such
powers and functions are  exercised and performed conc urrently by the  Assessing Officers of different
classes, any authority lower in rank amongst them shall exercise the powers and perform the functions as
any higher authority amongst them may direct, and, furt her, references in any other provision of this Act or
in any rule made thereunder to the Assessing Officer shall be deemed to be references to such higher
authority and any provision of this Act requiring approval or sanction of any such authority shall not apply.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any direction or order issued under this section, or in section 124,
the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that for the purpose of furnishing of the returnof income or the doing of any other act or thing under this Act or any rule made thereunder by any person or
class of persons, the income-tax authority exercising and performing the powers and functions in relation to
the said person or class of persons shall be such authority as may be specified in the notification.
Jurisdiction of Commissioners.

121. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Jurisdiction of Commissioners (Appeals).

121A.  [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. Original section was
inserted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1977, w .e.f. 10-7-1978. ]
Jurisdiction of Appellate Assistant Commissioners.

122. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Jurisdiction of Inspecting Assistant Commissioners.

123. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Jurisdiction of Assessing Officers.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
530 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

124. (1) Where by virtue of any direction or order issued under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of sectio n
120, the Assessing Officer has been vested with jurisdiction over any area, within the limits of such area, he
shall have jurisdiction—
(a) in respect of any person carrying on a business or pr ofession, if the place at which he carries on his
business or profession is situate within the area, or  where his business or profession is carried on in
more places than one, if the principal place of his business or profession is situate within the area,
and
(b) in respect of any other person residing within the area.
(2) Where a question arises under this section as to whether an Assessing Officer has jurisdiction to assess
any person, the question shall be determined by the Principal Director General or Director General or the
Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or the Principal Commissioner or Commissioner; orwhere the question is one relating to areas within the jurisdiction of different Principal Directors General or
Directors General or Principal Chief Commissioners or Chief Commissioners or Principal Commissioners or
Commissioners, by the Principal Directors General or Directors General or Principal Chief Commissionersor Chief Commissioners or Principal Commissioners or Commissioners concerned or, if they are not in
agreement, by the Board or by such Principal Direct or General or Director General or Principal Chief
Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner as the Board may, bynotification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) No person shall be entitled to call in question the jurisdiction of an Assessing Officer—
(a) where he has made a return under sub-section (1) of section 115WD or under sub-section (1) of
section 139, after the expiry of one month from the date on which he was served with a notice
under sub-section (1) of section 142 or sub-section (2) of section 115WE or sub-section (2) of
section 143 or after the completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier;
(b) where he has made no such return, after the expiry of the time allowed by the notice under
sub-section (2) of section 115WD or sub-sectio n (1) of section 142 or under sub-section (1) of
section 115WH or under section 148 for the making of the return or by the notice under the firstproviso  to  section  115WF or  under  the  first  proviso  to  section  144  to  show cause  why  the
assessment  should  not  be  completed  to  the  best  of  the  judgment  of  the  Assessing Officer,
whichever is earlier;
(c) where an action has been taken under section 132 or section 132A, after the expiry of one month
from the date on which he was served with a notice under sub-section (1) of section 153A or
sub-section (2) of section 153C or after the completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), where an assessee calls in question the jurisdiction of an
Assessing Officer, then the Assessing Officer shall, if not  satisfied with the correctness of the claim, refer the
matter for determination under sub-section (2) before the assessment is made.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in any direction or order issued under section 120,
every Assessing Officer shall have all the powers conferred by or under this Act on an Assessing Officer in
respect of the income accruing or arising or received within the area, if any, over which he has been vested
with jurisdiction by virtue of the directions or or ders issued under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 120.
Powers of Commissioner respecting specified areas, cases, persons, etc.

125. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
531 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Concurrent jurisdiction of Inspecting Assistant Commissioner and Income-tax Officer.

125A.  [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. Original section was
inserted by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975, w .e.f. 1-10-1975. ]
Powers of Board respecting specified area, classes of persons or incomes.

126. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Power to transfer cases.

127. (1) The Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner may, after giving the  assessee  a  reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter, wherever it is possible to do so, and after recording his reasons for
doing so, transfer any case from one or more Assessing  Officers subordinate to him (whether with or without
concurrent  jurisdiction) to any other Assessing Officer or Assessing Officers (whether with or without
concurrent jurisdiction) also subordinate to him.
(2) Where the Assessing Officer or Assessing Officers  from whom the case is to be transferred and the
Assessing Officer or Assessing Officers to whom the case is to be transferred are not subordinate to the samePrincipal Director General or Director General or Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner,—
(a) where the Principal Directors General or Directors General or Principal Chief Commissioners or
Chief  Commissioners or  Principal Commissioners or  Commissioners to  whom such  Assessing
Officers are subordinate are in agreement, then th e Principal Director General or Director General
or  Principal  Chief  Commissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner  or  Principal  Commissioner  or
Commissioner from whose jurisdiction the case is to be transferred may, after giving the assessee a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter, wherever it is possible to do so, and afterrecording his reasons for doing so, pass the order;
(b) where the Principal Directors General or Directors General or Principal Chief Commissioners or
Chief  Commissioners  or  Principal  Commissioners  or  Commissioners  aforesaid  are  not  inagreement, the  order transferring the  case  may, similarly, be  passed by the  Board or any such
Principal  Director  General  or  Director  General  or  Principal  Chief  Commissioner  or  Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissione r as the Board may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf.
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be deemed to require any such opportunity to be given
where the transfer is from any Assessing Officer or Assessing Officers (whether with or without concurrent
jurisdiction) to any other Assessing Officer or Assessing Officers (whether with or without  concurrent
jurisdiction) and the offices of all such officers are situated in the same city, locality or place.
(4) The  transfer of a  case  under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may be  made  at any stage  of the
proceedings, and shall not render necessary the re-issue of any notice already issued by the AssessingINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
532 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Officer or Assessing Officers from whom the case is transferred.
Explanation. —In section 120 and this section, the word "case", in relation to any person whose name is
specified in any order or direction issued thereunder, means all proceedings under this Act in respect of any
year which may be pending on the date of such order or direction or which may have been completed on or
before such date, and includes also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced after the dateof such order or direction in respect of any year.
Functions of Inspectors of Income-tax.

128. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. ]
Change of incumbent of an office.

129. Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this  Act an income-tax authority ceases to exercise
jurisdiction and is succeeded by another who has and exercises jurisdiction, the income-tax authority sosucceeding may continue the proceeding from the stage at which the proceeding was left by his predecessor:
Provided  that the assessee concerned may demand that before the proceeding is so continued the previous
proceeding or any part thereof be reopened or that be fore any order of assessment is passed against him, he
be reheard.
Faceless jurisdiction of income-tax authorities.

130. (1) The Central Government may make a scheme, by notification in  the  Official Gazette,  for  the
purposes of—
(a) exercise of all or any of the powers and performanc e of all or any of the functions conferred on, or,
as the case may be, assigned to income-tax authoritie s by or under this Act as referred to in section
120; or
(b) vesting the jurisdiction with the Assessing Officer as referred to in section 124; or
(c) exercise of power to transfer cases under section 127; or
(d) exercise of jurisdiction in case of change of incumbency as referred to in section 129,
so as to impart greater efficiency, transparency and accountab ility by—
(i) eliminating the interface between the income-tax authority and the assessee or any other
person, to the extent technologically feasible;
(ii) optimising  utilisation  of  the  resources  through  ec onomies  of  scale  and  functional
specialisation;
(iii) introducing a team-based exercise of powers and performance of functions by two or more
income-tax  authorities,  concurrently,  in  respect  of  any  area  or  persons or  classes of
persons or incomes or classes of  income  or  cases or  classes of  cases, with dynamicINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
533 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
jurisdiction.
(2) The Central Government may, for the purpose of givi ng effect to the scheme made under sub-section (1),
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an y of the provisions of this Act shall not apply or shall
apply with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification:
Provided  that no direction shall be issued after the 31st day of March, 2022.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may be after the
notification is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Income-tax Officer competent to perform any function or functions.

130A.  [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. Original section was
inserted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1967, w .e.f. 1-4-1967. ]
C.—Powers
Power regarding discovery, production of evidence, etc.

131.  (1)  The  Assessing  Officer,  Deputy  Commissioner  (Appeals),  Joint  Commissioner  74[,  Joint
Commissioner (Appeals)], Commissioner (Appeals), Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioneror Principal Commissioner or Commissioner and the Dispute Resolution Panel referred to in clause ( a) of
sub-section (15) of section 144C shall, for the purposes of  this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely :—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including  any officer of a banking company and examining
him on oath;
(c) compelling the pr oduction of books of account and other documents; and
(d) issuing commissions.
(1A) If the Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Director or Director or Joint Director
or Assistant Director or Deputy Director, or the author ised officer referred to in sub-section (1) of section
132 before he takes action under clauses ( i) to ( v) of that sub-section, has reason to suspect that any income
has been concealed, or is likely to be concealed, by any person or class of persons, within his jurisdiction,then, for the purposes of making any enquiry or investigation relating thereto, it shall be competent for him
to exercise the powers conferred under sub-section (1) on the income-tax authorities referred to in that
sub-section, notwithstanding that no proceedings with respect to such person or class of persons are pendingbefore him or any other income-tax authority.
(2) For the purpose of making an inquiry or investigat ion in respect of any person or class of persons in
relation to an agreement referred to in section 90 or section 90A, it shall be competent for any income-tax
authority not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax, as may be notified by the Board inthis behalf, to exercise the powers conferred under sub- section (1) on the income-tax authorities referred to
in that sub-section, notwithstanding that no proceedings with respect to such person or class of persons are
pending before it or any other income-tax authority.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
534 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any author ity referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A)
or sub-section (2) may impound and retain in its custody for such period as it thinks fit any books of account
or other documents produced before it in any proceeding under this Act :
Provided  that an Assessing Officer or an Assistant Director or Deputy Director shall not—
(a) impound any books of account or other documents without recording his reasons for so doing, or
(b) retain in his custody any such books or documents for a period exceeding fifteen days (exclusive of
holidays)  without  obtaining  the  approval  of  the  Principal  Chief  Co mmissioner  or  Chief
Commissioner or Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner or Principal Director or Director therefor, as the case may be.

74. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Search and seizure.

132. (1) Where the Principal Director General or Director  General or Principal Director or Director or the
Principal Chief  Commissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner  or  Principal Commissioner  or  Commissioner  or
Additional Director or Additional Commissioner or Joint Director or Joint Commissioner in consequence ofinformation in his possession, has reason to believe that—
(a) any person to whom a summons under sub-section (1) of section 37 of the Indian Income-tax Act,
1922 (11 of 1922), or under sub-section (1) of section 131 of this Act, or a notice under sub-section
(4) of section 22 of the Indian Income-tax Act,  1922, or under sub-section (1) of section 142 of this
Act was issued to produce, or cause to be produced, any books of account or other documents hasomitted or failed to produce, or cause to be produced, such books of account or other documents as
required by such summons or notice, or
(b) any person to whom a summons or notice as aforesaid has been or might be issued will not, or
would not, produce or cause to be produced, any books of account or other documents which will
be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922),
or under this Act, or
(c) any person is in possession of any money, bullion,  jewellery or other valuable article or thing and
such money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing represents either wholly or partly
income or property which has not been, or would not be, disclosed for the purposes of the Indian
Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or this Act (her einafter in this section referred to as the
undisclosed income or property),
then,—
(A) the Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Director or Director or the Principal
Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, as the
case may be, may authorise any Additional Director or Additional Commissioner or Joint Director,
Joint Commissioner, Assistant Director or Deputy Director, Assistant Commissioner or DeputyCommissioner or Income-tax Officer, orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
535 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(B) such Additional Director or Additional Commissioner or Joint Director, or Joint Commissioner, as
the case may be, may authorise any Assistant Dir ector or Deputy Director, Assistant Commissioner
or Deputy Commissioner or Income-tax Officer,
(the officer so authorised in all cases being hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer) to—
(i) enter and search any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft where he has reason to suspect that
such books of account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing
are kept;
(ii) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, a lmirah or other receptacle for exercising the
powers conferred by clause ( i) where the keys thereof are not available;
(iia) search any person who has got out of, or is about to get into, or is in, the building, place, vessel,
vehicle or aircraft, if the authorised officer has reason to suspect that such person has secreted
about his person any such books of account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other
valuable article or thing;
(iib) require any person who is found to be in possession or control of any books of account or other
documents maintained in the form of electronic record as defined in clause ( t) of sub-section (1) of
section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), to afford the authorised officer the
necessary facility to inspect such books of account or other documents;
(iii) seize any such books of account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable
article or thing found as a result of such search:
Provided that  bullion,  jewellery  or  other  valuable  article  or  thing,  being stock-in-trade  of  the
business, found as a result of such search shall not  be seized but the authorised officer shall make a
note or inventory of such stock-in-trade of the business;
(iv) place marks of identification on any books of account or other documents or make or cause to be
made extracts or copies therefrom;
(v) make a note or an inventory of any such money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing
:
Provided  that where any building, place, vessel, ve hicle or aircraft referred to in clause ( i) is within the area
of jurisdiction of any Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner, but such Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner orCommissioner has no jurisdiction over the person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c), then,
notwithstanding anything contained in section 120, it shall be competent for him to exercise the powers
under this sub-section in all cases where he has reason to believe that any delay in getting the authorisation
from the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner
having jurisdiction over such person may be prejudicial to the interests of the revenue :
Provided further  that where it is not possible or practicable to take physical possession of any valuable
article or thing and remove it to a safe place due to  its volume, weight or other physical characteristics or
due to its being of a dangerous nature, the authorised officer may serve an order on the owner or the person
who is in immediate possession or control thereof that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal with
it, except with the previous permission of such author ised officer and such action of the authorised officer
shall be deemed to be seizure of such valuable article or thing under clause ( iii):
Provided also that nothing contained in the second proviso shall apply in case of any valuable article or
thing, being stock-in-trade of the business:
Provided also that no authorisation shall be issued by the Additional Director or Additional Commissioner
or Joint Director or Joint Commissioner on or after the 1st day of October, 2009 unless he  has beenempowered by the Board to do so.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the reason to believe, as recorded by the
income-tax authority under this sub-section, shall not be disclosed to any person or any authority or theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
536 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Appellate Tribunal.
(1A)  Where  any  Principal Chief  Commissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner  or  Principal Commissioner  or
Commissioner, in consequence of information in his possession, has reason to suspect that any books of
account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing in respect of which an
officer has been authorised by the Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Director or
Director or any other Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or
Commissioner or Additional Director or Additional Commissioner or Joint Director or Joint Commissioner to
take action under clauses ( i) to ( v) of sub-section (1) are or is kept in any building, place, vessel, vehicle or
aircraft not mentioned in the authorisation under sub-section (1), such Principal Chief Co mmissioner or
Chief Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner may, notwithstanding anything contained
in section, authorise the said officer to take action  under any of the clauses aforesaid in respect of such
building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft.
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared  that the reason to suspect, as recorded by the
income-tax authority under this sub-section, shall not be disclosed to any person or any authority or the
Appellate Tribunal.
75[(2) The authorised officer may requisition the services of,—
(i) any police officer or of any officer of the Central Government, or of both; or
(ii) any person or entity as may be  approved by the  Principal Chief Commissioner or the  Chief
Commissioner or the Principal Director General or the Director General, in accordance with theprocedure, as may be prescribed, in this regard,
to assist him for all or any of the purposes specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) and it shall be the
duty of every such officer or person or entity to comply with such requisition.]
(3) The  authorised officer may, where it is not  practicable  to seize any such books of account, other
documents,  money,  bullion,  jewellery  or  other  valuable  article  or  thing,  for  reasons other  than  those
mentioned in the second proviso to sub-section (1), serve an order on the owner or the person who is inimmediate possession or control thereof that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal with it except
with the previous permission of such officer and such  officer may take such steps as may be necessary for
ensuring compliance with this sub-section.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declar ed that serving of an order as aforesaid under
this sub-section shall not be deemed to be seiz ure of such books of account, other documents, money,
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing under clause ( iii) of sub-section (1).
(4) The authorised officer may, during the course of th e search or seizure, examine on oath any person who
is found to be in possession or control of any books of account, documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or
other valuable  article  or thing and any statement  made  by such person during such examination may
thereafter be used in evidence in any proceeding under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or
under this Act.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the examination of any person under
this sub-section may be not merely in respect of an y books of account, other documents or assets found as a
result  of  the  search,  but  also in respect  of  all matters relevant  for  the  purposes of  any investigation
connected with any proceeding under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or under this Act.
(4A) Where any books of account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable article or
thing are or is found in the possession or control of any person in the course of a search, it may be
presumed—
(i) that such books of account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable article or
thing belong or belongs to such person;
(ii) that the contents of such books of account and other documents are true; andINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
537 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iii) that the signature and every other part of such books of account and other documents which
purport to be in the handwriting of any particular person or which may reasonably be assumed tohave been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, are in that person's
handwriting, and in the case of a document stamped, executed or attested, that it was duly stamped
and executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed or attested.
(5) [***]
(6) [***](7) [***](8) The books of account or other documents seized unde r sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) shall not be
retained by the authorised officer for a period exceeding 
76[one month from the end of the quarter in which
the order of assessment or reassessment or recomputation is made ] under sub-section (3) of section 143 or
section 144 or section 147 or section 153A or clause ( c) of section 158BC unless the reasons for retaining
the same are recorded by him in writing and the approval of the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner, Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, Principal Director General or Director General orPrincipal Director or Director for such retention is obtained :
Provided  that  the  Principal  Chief  Commissioner  or  Chief  Commissioner,  Principal  Commissioner  or
Commissioner, Principal Director General or Director General or Principal Director or Director shall not
authorise the retention of the books of account and other documents for a period exceeding thirty days afterall the proceedings under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or this Act in respect of the years
for which the books of account or other documents are relevant are completed.
(8A) An order under sub-section (3) shall not be in forc e for a period exceeding sixty days from the date of
the order.
(9) The person from whose custody any books of account or other documents are seized under sub-section
(1) or  sub-section (1A) may make  copies thereof, or take  extracts therefrom, in the  presence  of  the
authorised officer or any other person empowered by him in this behalf, at such place and time as the
authorised officer may appoint in this behalf.
(9A) Where the authorised officer has no jurisdiction over the person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b)
or clause ( c) of sub-section (1), the books of account or other documents, or any money, bu llion, jewellery
or other valuable article or thing (hereafter in this se ction and in sections 132A and 132B referred to as the
assets) seized under that sub-section shall be handed over by the authorised officer to the Assessing Officerhaving jurisdiction over such person within a period of sixty days from the date on which the last of the
authorisations for search was executed and thereupon the powers exercisable by the authorised officer under
sub-section (8) or sub-section (9) shall be exercisable by such Assessing Officer.
(9B) Where, during the course of the search or seizure or within a period of sixty days from the date on
which the last of the authorisations for search was executed, the  authorised officer, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, is satisfied that for the purpose of protecting the interest of revenue, it is necessary so to
do, he may with the previous approval of the Principal Director General or Director General or the Principal
Director or Director, by order in writing, attach pr ovisionally any property belonging to the assessee, and for
the said purposes, the provisions of the Second Schedule shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
(9C) Every provisional attachment made under sub-section (9B) shall cease to have effect after the expiry
of a period of six months from the date of the order referred to in sub-section (9B).
77[(9D) The authorised officer may, during the course of the search or seizure or within a period of sixty
days from the date on which the last of the authorisations for search was executed, make a reference to,—
(i) a V aluation Officer referred to in section 142A; or
(ii) any other person or entity or any valuer register ed by or under any law for the time being in force,
as may be  approved by the  Principal Chief Commissioner or the  Chief Commissioner or thePrincipal Director General or the Director General, in accordance with the procedure, as may beINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
538 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
prescribed, in this regard,
who shall estimate the fair market value of the property in the manner as may be prescribed, and submit a
report of the estimate to the authorised officer or th e Assessing Officer, as the case may be, within a period
of sixty days from the date of receipt of such reference.]
(10) If a person legally entitled to the books of account or other documents seized under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (1A) objects for any reason to the approval given by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner, Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, Principal Director General or Director General or
Principal Director or Director under sub-section (8), he  may make an application to the Board stating therein
the reasons for such objection and requesting for the re turn of the books of account or other documents and
the Board may, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders as it thinks fit.
(11) [***](11A) [***](12) [***](13) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches and seizure
shall apply, so far as may be, to searches and seizure under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A).
(14) The Board may make rules in relation to any sear ch or seizure under this section ; in particular, and
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for the procedure to be
followed by the authorised officer—
(i) for obtaining ingress into any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft to be searched where free
ingress thereto is not available ;
(ii) for ensuring safe custody of any books of account or other documents or assets seized.
78[Explanation 1. —For the purposes of sub-sections (9A), (9B) and (9D), the last of 79[authorisations ] for
search shall be deemed to have been executed,—
(a) in the case of search, on the conclusion of search as recorded in the last panchnama  drawn in
relation to any person in whose case the warrant of authorisation has been issued; or
(b) in the case of requisition under section 132A, on the actual receipt of the books of account or other
documents or assets by the authorised officer.]
Explanation 2.— In this section, the word "proceeding" m eans any proceeding in respect  of any year,
whether under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or this Act, which may be pending on the date
on which a search is authorised under this section or which may have been completed on or before such date
and includes also all proceedings under this Act which ma y be commenced after such date in respect of any
year.

75. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

76. Sub. for "thirty days from the date of the order of assessment or reassessment or recomputation" by
Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

77. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

78. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.r.e.f. 1-4-2022.

79. Sub. for "authorisation" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
539 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Powers to requisition books of account, etc .