185. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other pr ovision of this Act, where a firm does not comply
with the provisions of section 184 for any assessment year, the firm shall be so assessed that no deduction byway of any payment of interest, salary, bonus, co mmission or remuneration, by whatever name called, made
by such firm to any partner of such firm shall be allowed in computing the income chargeable under the
head  "Profits  and  gains  of  business  or  profession"  and  such  interest,  salary,  bonus,  co mmission  or
remuneration shall not be chargeable to income-tax under clause ( v) of section 28.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
645 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
C.—Changes in constitution, succession and dissolution
Change in constitution of a firm.

187. (1) Where at the time of making an assessment unde r section 143 or section 144 it is found that a
change has occurred in the constitution of a firm, the assessment shall be made on the firm as constituted atthe time of making the assessment.
(2) For the purposes of this section, there is a change in the constitution of the firm—
(a) if one or more of the partners cease to be part ners or one or more new partners are admitted, in
such circumstances that one or more of the persons who were partners of the firm before the
change continue as partner or partners after the change ; or
(b) where all the partners continue with a change in their respective shares or in the shares of some of
them :
Provided  that nothing contained in clause ( a) shall apply to a case where the firm is dissolved on the death
of any of its partners.
Succession of one firm by another firm.

188. Where a firm carrying on a business or profession is succeeded by another firm, and the case is not one
covered by section 187, separate assessments shall be made on the predecessor firm and the successor firm
in accordance with the provisions of section 170.
Joint and several liability of partners for tax payable by firm.

188A.  Every person who was, during the previous year, a partner of a firm, and the legal representative of
any such person who is deceased, shall be jointly an d severally liable along with the firm for the amount of
tax, penalty or other sum payable by the firm for the assessment year to which such previous year is
relevant, and all the provisions of this Act, so far as  may be, shall apply to the assessment of such tax or
imposition or levy of such penalty or other sum.
Firm dissolved or business discontinued.

189. (1) Where any business or profession carried on by a firm has been discontinued or where a firm is
dissolved, the Assessing Officer shall make an assessment of the total income of the firm as if no such
discontinuance or dissolution had taken place, and all the provisions of this Act, including the provisions
relating to the levy of a penalty or any other sum char geable under any provision of this Act, shall apply, so
far as may be, to such assessment.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing sub-section, if the Assessing Officer or 
57[the Joint
Commissioner (Appeals) or] the Commissioner (Appeals) in  the course of any proceeding under this Act in
respect of any such firm as is referred to in that sub-se ction is satisfied that the firm was guilty of any of theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
646 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
acts specified in Chapter XXI, he may impose or direct  the imposition of a penalty in accordance with the
provisions of that Chapter.
(3) Every person who was at the time of such discontinuance or dissolution a partner of the firm, and the
legal representative of any such person who is dec eased, shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount
of tax, penalty or other sum payable, and all the provisi ons of this Act, so far as may be, shall apply to any
such assessment or imposition of penalty or other sum.
Explanation. —[Omitted by the Finance Act, 1992, w.e.f. 1-4-1993. ]
(4) Where such discontinuance or dissolution takes place after any proceedings in respect of an assessment
year have commenced, the proceedings may be continued against the person referred to in sub-section (3)
from the stage at which the proceedings stood at the t ime of such discontinuance or dissolution, and all the
provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of sub-section (6) of section 159.

57. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Provisions applicable to past assessments of firms.

189A.  In relation to the assessment of any firm and its partners for the assessment year commencing on the
1st  day  of  April,  1992,  or  any  earlier  assessment  y ear,  the  provisions of  this Chapter  as they  stood
immediately before the 1st day of April, 1993, shall continue to apply.
Chapter XVII
Collection and recovery of tax
A.—General
Deduction at source and advance payment.

190. (1) Notwithstanding that the regular assessment in respect  of any income  is to be  made  in a  later
assessment year, the tax on such income shall be payabl e by deduction or collection at source or by advance
payment or by payment under sub-section (1A) of section 192, as the case may be, in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prejudice  the  ch arge  of tax on such income  under the  provisions of
sub-section (1) of section 4.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
647 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Direct pa yment .

191. (1) In the case of income in respect of which provision is not made under this Chapter for deducting
income-tax at the time of payment, and in any case where income-tax has not been deducted in accordancewith the provisions of this Chapter, income-tax shall be payable by the assessee direct.
(2) For the purposes of paying income-tax directly by  the assessee under sub-section (1), if the income of
the assessee in any assessment year, beginning on or af ter the 1st day of April, 2021, includes income of the
nature specified in clause ( vi) of sub-section (2) of section 17 and such specified security or sweat equity
shares referred to in the said clause are allotted or transferred directly or indirectly by the current employer,
being an eligible start-up referred to in section 80-IAC, the income-tax on such income shall be payable by
the assessee within fourteen days—
(i) after the expiry of forty-eight months from the end of the relevant assessment year; or
(ii) from the date of the sale of such specified security or sweat equity share by the assessee; or
(iii) from the  date  of  the  assessee  ceasing to  be  the  employee  of  the  employer  who  allotted  or
transferred him such specified security or sweat equity share,
whichever is the earliest.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that if any person including the principal
officer of a company,—
(a) who is required to deduct any sum in accordance with the provisions of this Act; or
(b) referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 192, being an employer,
does not deduct, or after so deducting fails to pay, or  does not pay, the whole or any part of the tax, as
required by or under this Act, and where the assessee has also failed to pay such tax directly, then, such
person shall, without prejudice to any other consequenc es which he may incur, be deemed to be an assessee
in default within the meaning of sub-section (1) of section 201, in respect of such tax.
B.—Deduction at source
Salary.

192.(1) Any person responsible for paying any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" shall, at the
time of payment, deduct income-tax on the amount payable at the average rate of income-tax computed on
the basis of the rates in force for the financial year in which the payment is made, on the estimated income
of the assessee under this head for that financial year.
(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the person responsible for paying any
income in the nature of a perquisite which is not pr ovided for by way of monetary payment, referred to in
clause ( 2) of section 17, may pay, at his option, tax on the whole or part of such income without making any
deduction therefrom at the time when such tax was otherwise deductible under the provisions of sub-section(1).
(1B) For the purpose of paying tax under sub-section (1A), tax shall be determined at the average of
income-tax computed on the basis of the rates in force for the financial year, on the income chargeable
under the head "Salaries" including the income referred to in sub-section (1A), and the tax so payable shallbe construed as if it were, a tax deductible at source,  from the income under the head "Salaries" as per the
provisions of sub-section (1), and shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
(1C) For the purposes of deducting or paying tax under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A), as the case may
be, a person, being an eligible start-up referred to in section 80-IAC, responsible for paying any income toINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
648 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
the assessee being perquisite of the nature specified in 57a[sub-clause ( vi) of clause ( 2)] of section 17 in any
previous year relevant to the assessment year, beginning  on or after the 1st day of April, 2021, shall deduct
or pay, as the case may be, tax on such income within fourteen days—
(i) after the expiry of forty-eight months from the end of the relevant assessment year; or
(ii) from the date of the sale of such specified security or sweat equity share by the assessee; or
(iii) from the date of the assessee ceasing to be the employee of the person,
whichever is the earliest, on the basis of rates in fo rce for the financial year in which the said specified
security or sweat equity share is allotted or transferred.
(2) Where, during the financial year, an assessee is employed simultaneously under more than one employer,
or where he has held successively employment under more than one employer, he may furnish to the personresponsible for making the payment referred to in sub-section (1) (being one of the said employers as the
assessee may, having regard to the circumstances of his case choose), such details of the income under the
head "Salaries" due or received by him from the other employer or employers, the tax deducted at sourcetherefrom and such other particulars, in such form an d verified in such manner as may be prescribed, and
thereupon the person responsible for making the payment referred to above shall take into account the
details so furnished for the purposes of making the deduction under sub-section (1).
(2A) Where the assessee, being a Government servant or an employee in a company, co-operative society,
local authority, university, institution, association or body is entitled to the relief under 
58[***] section 89, he
may furnish to the person responsible for making the payment referred to in sub-section (1), such particulars,
in such form and verified in such manner as may be  prescribed, and thereupon the person responsible as
aforesaid shall compute the relief on the basis of such particulars and take it into account in making thededuction under sub-section (1).
Explanation. —For  the  purposes  of  this  sub-section,  "University"  means  a  University  established  or
incorporated by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, and includes an institution declared under
section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), to be a University for the purposes ofthat Act.
59[(2B) Where an assessee who receives any income char geable under the head "Salaries" has, in addition,
—
(i) any income chargeable under any other head of in come (not being a loss under any such head other
than the loss under the head "Income from house property"); or
(ii) any tax deducted or collected under the provisions of Part B or Part BB of this Chapter, as the case
may be,
for the same financial year, he may send to the pers on responsible for making the payment referred to in
sub-section (1), the particulars of—
(a) such other income;
(b) any tax deducted or collected under any other provision of Part B or Part BB of this Chapter, as
the case may be; and
(c) the loss, if any, under the head "Income from house property",
in such form and verified in such manner as may be  prescribed, and thereupon the person responsible as
aforesaid shall take into account the particulars referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) for the purposes of
making the deduction under sub-section (1):
Provided  that this sub-section shall not in any case ha ve the effect of reducing the tax deductible from
income under the head "Salaries", except where the loss under the head "Income from house property" and
the tax deducted in accordance with other provisions of  Part B and tax collected in accordance with the
provisions of Part BB, of this Chapter, has been taken into account.]
(2C) A person responsible for paying any income char geable under the head "Salaries" shall furnish to theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
649 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
person to whom such payment is made a statement giving correct and complete particulars of perquisites or
profits in lieu of salary provided to him and the value thereof in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2D) The person responsible for making the payment referred to in sub-section (1) shall, for the purposes of
estimating income  of the  assessee  or computing tax deductible  under sub-section (1), obtain from the
assessee the evidence or proof or particulars of prescribed claims (including claim for set-off of loss) underthe provisions of the Act in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The person responsible for making the payment refe rred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) or
sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A) or sub-section (2B) may, at the time of making any deduction, increase
or reduce the amount to be deducted under this section for the purpose of adjusting any excess or deficiencyarising out of any previous deduction or failure to deduct during the financial year.
(4) The trustees of a recognised provident fund, or any person authorised by the regulations of the fund to
make payment of accumulated balances due to employees, shall, in cases where sub-rule (1) of rule 9 of Part
A of the Fourth Schedule applies, at the time an accumulated balance due to an employee is paid, maketherefrom the deduction provided in rule 10 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule.
(5) Where any contribution made by an employer, including interest on such contributions, if any, in an
approved superannuation fund is paid to the employee, tax on the amount so paid shall be deducted by the
trustees of the fund to the extent provided in rule 6 of Part B of the Fourth Schedule.
(6) For the purposes of deduction of tax on salary paya ble in foreign currency, the value in rupees of such
salary shall be calculated at the prescribed rate of exchange.
57a. Sub. for "clause ( vi) of sub-section (2)" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

58. Words "sub-section (1) of" omtt. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

59. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Payment of accumulated balance due to an employee.

192A.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the trustees of the Employees' Provident Funds
Scheme, 1952, framed under section 5 of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1952 (19 of 1952) or any person authorised under the scheme to make payment of accumulated
balance due to employees, shall, in a case where the accumulated balance due to an employee participating
in a recognised provident fund is includible in his tota l income owing to the provisions of rule 8 of Part A of
the Fourth Schedule not being applicable, at the time of payment of the accumulated balance due to theemployee, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent :
Provided that no deduction under this section shall be made where the amount of such payment or, as the
case may be, the aggregate amount of such payment to the payee is less than fifty thousand rupees.
60[***]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
650 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

60. Second proviso omtt. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Interest on securities.

193. The person responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of interest on securities shall, at the
time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by
issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, 61[being the amount or the aggregate
of amounts exceeding ten thousand rupees during the financial year, ] deduct income-tax at the rates in
force on the amount of the interest payable :
Provided that no tax shall be deducted from—
(i) any interest payable on 4¼ per cent National Defence Bonds, 1972, where the bonds are held by
an individual, not being a non-resident; or
(ia) any interest payable to an individual on 4¼ per cent National Defence Loan, 1968, or 4¾ per cent
National Defence Loan, 1972; or
(ib) any interest payable on National Development Bonds; or
(ii) [***]
(iia) any interest payable on 7-Year National Savings Certificates (IV Issue); or
(iib) any interest payable on such debentures, issued by any institution or authority, or any public sector
company,  or  any  co-operative  society  (including  a  co-operative  land  mortgage  bank  or  a
co-operative  land development  bank), as the  Central Government  may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(iii) any interest payable on 6½ per cent Gold Bonds , 1977, or 7 per cent Gold Bonds, 1980, where the
Bonds  are  held  by  an  individual not  being a  non-resident,  and  the  holder  thereof  makes  a
declaration in writing before the person responsible for paying the interest that the total nominalvalue of the 6½ per cent Gold Bonds, 1977, or, as the case may be, the 7 per cent Gold Bonds,
1980, held by him (including such bonds, if any, held on his behalf by any other person) did not in
either case exceed ten thousand rupees at any time during the period to which the interest relates;
(iiia) [***]
(iv) any interest payable on any security of the Central Government or a State Government:
62[Provided  that nothing in this clause shall apply to the interest exceeding ten thousand rupees
payable  during the  financial  year  on  8%  Savings  (Taxable)  Bonds,  2003  or  7.75%  Savings(Taxable) Bonds, 2018 or Floating Rate Savings Bonds, 2020 (Taxable) or any other security of the
Central Government or State Government as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;]
(v) any interest payable to an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, who is resident in India, on any
debenture issued by a company in which the public are substantially interested, if—
(a) the amount of interest or, as the case may be, the aggregate amount of such interest paid or
likely to be paid on such debenture during the financial year by the company to such
individual or Hindu undivided fa mily does not exceed 
63[ten] thousand rupees; and
(b) such interest is paid by the company by an account payee cheque;
(vi) any  interest  payable  to  the  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of  India  established  under  the  Life
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), inrespect of any securities owned by it or in whichit has full beneficial interest; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
651 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(vii) any interest payable to the General Insurance Cor poration of India (hereafter in this clause referred
to as the Corporation) or to any of the four companies (hereafter in this clause referred to as suchcompany), formed by virtue of the schemes framed under sub-section (1) of section 16 of the
General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972), in respect of any securities
owned by the Corporation or such company or in which the Corporation or such company has fullbeneficial interest; or
(viii) any interest payable to any other insurer in respect of any securities owned by it or in which it has
full beneficial interest;
64[(ix)any interest payable to a "business trust", as defined in clause ( 13A) of section 2, in respect of any
securities, by a special purpose vehicle referred to in the Explanation  to clause ( 23FC ) of section

10.]
Explanation .—For the  purposes of this section, where  any income  by way of interest on securities is
credited to any account, whether called "Interest payable account" or "Suspense account" or by any othername, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be
credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.
Explanation 2. —[Omitted by the Finance Act, 1992, w.e.f. 1-6-1992. ]

61. Ins. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

62. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

63. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

64. Sub. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Dividends.

194. The principal officer of an Indian company or a company which has made the prescribed arrangements
for the declaration and payment of dividends (including dividends on preference shares) within India, shall,
before making any payment by any mode in respect of  any dividend or before making any distribution or
payment to a shareholder, who is resident in India, of any dividend within the meaning of sub-clause ( a) or
sub-clause ( b) or sub-clause ( c) or sub-clause ( d) or sub-clause ( e) 
65[or sub-clause ( f)] of clause ( 22) of
section 2, deduct from the amount of such dividend, income-tax at the rate of ten per cent :
Provided that no such deduction shall be made in the case of a shareholder, being an individual, if—
(a) the dividend is paid by the company by any mode other than cash; and
(b) the amount of such dividend or, as the case ma y be, the aggregate of the amounts of such dividend
distributed or paid or likely to be distributed or  paid during the financial year by the company to
the shareholder, does not exceed 66[ten] thousand rupees:
Provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply to such income credited or paid to—
(a) the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act,
1956 (31 of 1956), in respect of any shares owned by it or in which it has full beneficial interest;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
652 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) the  General  Insurance  Corporation  of  India  (her e a f t e r i n t h i s p r o v i s o r e f e r r e d t o a s t h e
Corporation)  or  to  any  of  the  four  companies (hereafter  in  this proviso  referred  to  as  suchcompany), formed by virtue of the schemes framed under sub-section (1) of section 16 of the
General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972), in respect of any shares
owned by the Corporation or such company or in which the Corporation or such company has fullbeneficial interest;
(c) any other insurer in respect of any shares owned by it or in which it has full beneficial interest;
(d) a "business trust", as defined in clause ( 13A) of section 2, by a special purpose vehicle referred to
in the Explanation  to clause ( 23FC ) of section 10;
(e) any other person as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this
behalf.

65. Ins. by Act No. 15 of Act, 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.

66. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Interest other than "Interest on securities".

194A.  (1) Any person, not being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, who is res ponsible for paying to
a resident any income by way of interest other than income by way of interest on securities, shall, at the time
of credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of
a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is ea rlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force
:
Provided that an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, whose total sales, gross receipts or tur nover from
the business or profession carried on by him exceed one crore rupees in case of business or fifty lakh rupees
in  case  of  profession  during the  financial year  immediately  preceding the  financial year  in  which  suchinterest is credited or paid, shall be liable to deduct income-tax under this section.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, where any income by way of interest as aforesaid is credited
to any account, whether called "Interest payable account" or "Suspense account" or by any other name, in
the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit ofsuch income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.
(2) [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1992, w .e.f. 1-6-1992. ]
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply—
(i) where the amount of such income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such
income credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the financial year by the person
referred to in sub-section (1) to the account of, or to, the payee, does not exceed—
(a)
67[fifty] thousand rupees, where the payer is a banking company to which the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) applies (including any bank or banking institution,referred to in section 51 of that Act);
(b)
67[fifty] thousand rupees, where the payer is a co-operative society engaged in carrying on
the business of banking;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
653 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c)67[fifty] thousand rupees, on any deposit with post office under any scheme framed by the
Central Government and notified by it in this behalf; and
(d)68[ten] thousand rupees in any other case]:
Provided  that in respect of the income credited or paid in respect of—
(a) time deposits with a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of
1949) applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that
Act); or
(b) time deposits with a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking;
(c) deposits with a public company which is formed and registered in India with the main
object  of carrying on the  business of providing long-term finance  for construction or
purchase of houses in India for residential purposes and which is eligible for deductionunder clause ( viii) of sub-section (1) of section 36;
the aforesaid amount shall be computed with reference to the income credited or paid by a branch
of the banking company or the co-operative society or the public company, as the case may be :
Provided further that the amount referred to in the first proviso shall be computed with reference
to the income credited or paid by the banking company or the co-operative society or the public
company, as the case may be, where such banking  company or the co-operative society or the
public company has adopted core banking solutions:
Provided also that  in case  of payee  being a  senior citizen, the  provisions of sub-clause  ( a),
sub-clause ( b), and sub-clause ( c) shall have effect as if for the words " 
68[fifty] thousand rupees",
the words " 69-70[one lakh ] rupees" had been substituted.
Explanation.— [***]
(ii) [***]
(iii) to such income credited or paid to—
(a) any banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies, or
any co-operative  society engaged in carrying on the  business of banking (including a
co-operative land mortgage bank), or
(b) any financial corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or
(c) the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation
Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), or
(d) the Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963), or
(e) any company or co-operative society carrying on the business of insurance, or
(f) such other institution, association or body or class of institutions, associations or bodies
which the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, notify in thisbehalf in the Official Gazette:
Provided  that no notification under this sub-clause shall be issued on or after the 1st day of April,
2020;
(iv) to such income credited or paid by a firm to a partner of the firm;
(v) to such income credited or paid by a co-operative society (other than a co-operative bank) to a
member  thereof  or  to  such  income  credited  or  paid  by  a  co-operative  society  to  any  otherco-operative society.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, "co-operative bank" shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);
(vi) to such income credited or paid in respect of  deposits under any scheme framed by the Central
Government and notified by it in this behalf in the Official Gazette;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
654 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(vii) to such income credited or paid in respect of deposits (other than time deposits made on or after
the 1st day of July, 1995) with a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10of 1949) applies (including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);
(viia) to such income credited or paid in respect of,—
(a) deposits  with  a  primary  agricultural credit  society  or  a  primary  credit  society  or  a
co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank;
(b) deposits (other than time deposits made on or after the 1st day of July, 1995) with a
co-operative society, other than a co-operative society or bank referred to in sub-clause(a), engaged in carrying on the business of banking;
(viii) to such income credited or paid by the Central Government under any provision of this Act or the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or the Estate Duty Act, 1953 (34 of 1953), or theWealth-tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957), or the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958), or the Super Profits Tax
Act,  1963  (14  of  1963),  or  the  Companies  (Pro fits)  Surtax  Act,  1964  (7  of  1964),  or  the
Interest-tax Act, 1974 (45 of 1974);
(ix) to such income credited by way of interest on the compensation amount awarded by the Motor
Accidents Claims Tribunal;
(ixa) to such income  paid by way of interest  on the  compensation amount  awarded by the  Motor
Accidents Claims Tribunal where the amount of such  income or, as the case may be, the aggregate
of the amounts of such income paid during the financial year does not exceed fifty thousand
rupees;
(x) to such income which is paid or payable by an infrastructure capital company or infrastructure
capital fund or infrastructure debt fund or a public  sector company or scheduled bank in relation to
a zero coupon bond issued on or after the 1st day of June, 2005 by  such company or fund or public
sector company or scheduled bank;
(xi) to any income by way of interest referred to in clause ( 23FC ) of section 10:
Provided  that a co-operative society referred to in clause ( v) or clause ( viia) shall be liable to deduct
income-tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), if—
(a) the total sales, gross receipts or turnover of the co-operative society exceeds fifty crore rupees
during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which the interest referred to
in sub-section (1) is credited or paid; and
(b) the amount of interest, or the aggregate of the amount s of such interest, credited or paid, or is likely
to be credited or paid, during the financial year is more than 
71[one lakh ] rupees in case of payee
being a senior citizen and 72[fifty] thousand rupees in any other case.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of clauses ( i), (vii) and ( viia), "time deposits" means deposits (including
recurring deposits) repayable on the expiry of fixed periods.
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this sub-section, "senior ci tizen" means an individual resident in India
who is of the age of sixty years or more at any time during the relevant previous year.
(4) The person responsible for making the payment referred to in sub-section (1) may, at the time of making
any deduction, increase or reduce the amount to be deducted under this section for the purpose of adjustingany excess or deficiency arising out of any previous deduction or failure to deduct during the financial year.
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, provide that the deduction of tax
shall not be made or shall be made at such lower rate, from such payment to such person or class of persons,
as may be specified in the said notification.
Explanation.— [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1992, w.e.f. 1-6-1992. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
655 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

67. Sub. for "forty" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Earlier "forty" was Sub. for "ten" by Act No.
7 of 2019, w.e.f. 1-4-2019.

68. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
69-70 . Sub. for "fifty thousand" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

71. Sub. for "fifty thousand" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

72. Sub. for "forty" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Winnings from lottery or crossword puzzle 73[, etc.].

194B.  The person responsible for paying to any person any income by way of winnings from any lottery or
crossword puzzle or card game and other game of any sort 74[or from gambling or betting of any form or
nature whatsoever, being the amount 75[in respect of a single transaction ] exceeding ten thousand rupees
76[***]] shall, at the time of payment thereof, deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force :
Provided that in a case where the winnings are wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind but the
part in cash is not sufficient to meet the liability of deduction of tax in respect of whole of the winnings, the
person responsible for paying shall, before releasing the winnings, ensure that tax has been paid in respect ofthe winnings:
77[Provided further  that  nothing contained in this section shall apply to deduction of income-tax on
winnings from any online game on or after the 1st day of April, 2023.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, "online game" sh all have the meaning assigned to it in clause
(iii) of the Explanation  to section 115BBJ.]

73. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

74. Sub. for "in an amount exceeding ten thousand rupees" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

75. Sub. for "or the aggregate of amounts" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

76. Words "during the financial year" omtt. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

77. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
77[Winnings from online games.

194BA.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, any person responsible
for paying to any person any income by way of winnings from any online game during the financial year
shall deduct income-tax on the  net  winnings in his user account, computed in the manner as may beprescribed, at the end of the financial year at the rates in force:
Provided  that in a case where there is a withdrawal from user account during the financial year, the
income-tax shall be  deducted at  the  time  of such withdrawal on the  net  winnings comprised in such
withdrawal, as well as on the remaining amount of ne t winnings in the user account, computed in the mannerINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
656 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
as may be prescribed, at the end of the financial year.
(2) In a case where the net winnings are wholly in kind or partly in cash, and partly in kind but the part in
cash is not sufficient to meet the liability of deduction of tax in respect of whole of the net winnings, the
person responsible for paying shall, before releasing the winnings, ensure that tax has been paid in respect of
the net winnings.
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section, the Board may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the purposes of removing the difficulty.
(4) Every guideline issued by the Board under sub-section (3) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be
laid before each House of Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the person
liable to deduct income-tax.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section—
(a) "computer resource", "internet" and "online game" shall have the meanings respectively assigned
to them in section 115BBJ;
(b) "online gaming intermediary" means an intermediary that offers one or more online games;
(c) "user" means any person who accesses or avails any computer resource  of an online  gaming
intermediary;
(d) "user account" means account of a user registered with an online gaming intermediary.]

77. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Winnings from horse race.

194BB.  Any person, being a bookmaker or a person to whom a licence has been granted by the Government
under any law for the time being in force for horse racing in any race course or for arranging for wagering or
betting in any race course, who is responsible for payi ng to any person any inco me by way of winnings from
any horse race 78[, being the amount 79[in respect of a single transaction ] exceeding ten thousand rupees
80[***],] shall, at the time of payment thereof, deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force.

78. Sub. for "in an amount exceeding ten thousand rupees" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f.1-4-2023.

79. Sub. for "or aggregate of amounts" by the Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .

80. Words "during the financial year" omtt. by the Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
657 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Payments to contractors .

194C.  (1) Any person responsible for paying any sum to any resident (hereafter in this section referred to as
the  contractor)  for  carrying out  any  work  (incl uding supply  of  labour  for  carrying out  any  work)  in
pursuance of a contract between the contractor and a specified person shall, at the time of credit of such
sum to the account of the contractor or at the time of  payment thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or
draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct an amount equal to—
(i) one per cent where the payment is being made or credit is being given to an individual or a Hindu
undivided fa mily;
(ii) two per cent where the payment is being made or credit is being given to a person other than an
individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily,
of such sum as income-tax on income comprised therein.
(2) Where any sum referred to in sub-section (1) is  credited to any account, whether called "Suspense
account" or by any other name, in the books of account  of the person liable to pay such income, such
crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such income  to the account of the payee and the provisions of this
section shall apply accordingly.
(3) Where any sum is paid or credited for carrying out any work mentioned in sub-clause ( e) of clause ( iv) of
the Explanation, tax shall be deducted at source—
(i) on the invoice value excluding the value of material, if such value is mentioned separately in the
invoice; or
(ii) on the whole of the invoice value, if the value of material is not mentioned separately in the
invoice.
(4) No individual or Hindu undivided fa mily shall be liable to deduct income-tax on the sum credited or paid
to the account of the contractor where such sum is credited or paid exclusively for personal purposes of such
individual or any member of Hindu undivided fa mily.
(5) No deduction shall be made from the amount of any su m credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid
to the account of, or to, the contractor, if such sum does not exceed thirty thousand rupees :
Provided  that where the aggregate of the amounts of such sums credited or paid or likely to be credited or
paid during the financial year exceeds one lakh rupees, the person responsible for paying such sums referred
to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to deduct income-tax under this section.
(6) No deduction shall be made from any sum credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the
previous year to the account of a contractor during the course of business of plying, hiring or leasing goodscarriages, where such contractor owns ten or less goods  carriages at any time during the previous year and
furnishes a declaration to that effect along with his Permanent Account Number, to the person paying or
crediting such sum.
(7) The person responsible for paying or crediting any sum to the person referred to in sub-section (6) shall
furnish, to the prescribed income-tax authority or the person authorised by it, such particulars, in such form
and within such time as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "specified person" shall mean,—
(a) the Central Government or any State Government; or
(b) any local authority; or
(c) any corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act; or
(d) any company; or
(e) any co-operative society; orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
658 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(f) any authority, constituted in India by or under any law, engaged either for the purpose of
dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the purpose ofplanning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages, or for both; or
(g) any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or under
any law corresponding to that Act in force in any part of India; or
(h) any trust; or
(i) any university established or incorporated by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act
and an institution declared to be a university under section 3 of the University GrantsCommission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956); or
(j) any Government of a foreign State or a foreign enterprise or any association or body
established outside India; or
(k) any firm; or
(l) any person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily or an association of persons or
a body of individuals, if such person,—
(A) does not fall under any of the preceding sub-clauses; and
(B) has total sales, gross receipts or turnove r from business or profession carried on
by him exceeding one crore rupees in case of business or fifty lakh rupees in case
of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in
which such sum is credited or paid to the account of the contractor;
(ii) "goods carriage" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Explanation to sub-section (7) of
section 44AE;
(iii) "contract" shall include sub-contract;
(iv) "work" shall include—
(a) advertising;
(b) broadcasting and telecasting including production of progra-mmes for such broadcasting or
telecasting;
(c) carriage of goods or passengers by any mode of transport other than by railways;
(d) catering;
(e) manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a
customer by using material purchased from such customer or its associate, being a person
placed similarly in relation to such customer as is the  person placed in relation to the
assessee under the provisions contained in clause ( b) of sub-section (2) of section 40A,
81[but does not include—
(A) manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a
customer  by  using material  purchased  from  a  person,  other  than  such  customer  or
associate of such customer; or
(B) any sum referred to in sub-section (1) of section 194J.]

81. Sub. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
659 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Insurance commission.

194D.  Any person responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of remuneration or reward,
whether  by way of  commission or otherwise, for  soliciting or  procuring insurance  business (includingbusiness relating to the continuance, renewal or revival of  policies of insurance) shall, at the time of credit of
such income to the account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or
draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force :
Provided  that no deduction shall be made under this section from any such income credited or paid before
the 1st day of June, 1973:
Provided further  that no deduction shall be made under this  section in a case where the amount of such
income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid or likely to be
credited or paid during the financial year to the account of, or to, the payee, does not exceed 
82[twenty ]
thousand rupees.

82. Sub. for "fifteen" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Earlier "fifteen" was Sub. for "twenty" by
Act No. 28 of 2016, w.e.f. 1-6-2016 and "twenty" was Sub. for "five" by Act No. 14 of 2010, w.e.f.
1-7-2010.
Payment in respect of life insurance policy.

194DA.  Any person responsible for paying to a resident  any sum under a life insurance policy, including the
sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy, othe r than the amount not includible in the total income
under clause ( 10D) of section 10, shall, at the time of payment thereof, deduct income-tax thereon at the
rate of 83[two] per cent on the amount of income comprised therein :
Provided  that no deduction under this section shall be ma de where the amount of such payment or, as the
case may be, the aggregate amount of such payments to the payee during the financial year is less than onehundred thousand rupees.

83. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Payments to non-resident sportsmen or sports associations.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
660 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
194E . Where any income referred to in section 115BBA  is payable to a non-resident sportsman (includin g
an athlete) or an entertainer who is not a citizen of India or a non-resident sports association or institution,
the person responsible for making the payment shall, at the time of credit of such income to the account of
the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode,
whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of twenty per cent.
Payments in respect of deposits under National Savings Scheme, etc.

194EE.  The person responsible for paying to any person any amount referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section
(2) of section 80CCA shall, at the time of payment ther eof, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per
cent :
Provided  that no deduction shall be made under this sect ion where the amount of such payment or, as the
case may be, the aggregate amount of such payments to the payee during the financial year is less than twothousand five hundred rupees :
Provided further  that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the payment of the said amount to the
heirs of the assessee.
Payments on account of repurchase of units by Mutual Fund or Unit T rust of India.

194F. [Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2024, w .e.f. 1-10-2024. ]
Commission, etc., on sale of lottery tickets.

194G.  (1) Any person who is responsible for paying, on or after the 1st day of October, 1991 to any person,
who  is  or  has  been  stocking,  distributing,  purchasing or  selling lottery  tickets,  any  income  by  way  of
commission, remuneration or prize (by whatever name called) on such tickets in an amount exceeding
84[twenty ] thousand rupees shall, at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or at the
time of payment of such income in cash or by th e issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode,
whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of 85[two] per cent.
(2) [***](3) [***]Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, where any income is credited to any account, whether called
"Suspense Account" or by any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income,
such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of
this section shall apply accordingly.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
661 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

84. Sub. for "fifteen" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Earlier "fifteen" was Sub. for "one" by Act
No. 28 of 2016, w.e.f. 1-6-2016.

85. Sub. for "Five" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Commission or brokerage.

194H.  Any person, not being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, who is res ponsible for paying, on or
after the 1st day of June, 2001, to a resident, any income by way of co mmission (not being insurance
commission referred to in section 194D) or brokerage, shall, at the time of credit of such income to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment of such  income in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or
by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of 85[two] per cent :
Provided  that no deduction shall be made under this section in a case where the amount of such income or,
as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid or likely to be credited or
paid during the financial year to the acc ount of, or to, the payee, does not exceed 86-87[twenty ] thousand
rupees :
Provided further that  an individual or a  Hindu undivided fa mily,  whose  total sales,  gross  receipts or
turnover from the business or profession carried on by  him exceed one crore rupees in case of business or
fifty lakh rupees in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year inwhich such commission or brokerage is credited or paid, shall be liable to deduct income-tax under this
section:
Provided also that no deduction shall be made under this section on any co mmission or brokerage payable
by  Bharat  Sanchar  Nigam Limited  or  Mahanagar  Tele phone  Nigam L imited  to  their  public  call office
franchisees.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "commission or brokerage" includes any payment receiv ed or receivable, directly or indirectly, by a
person acting on behalf of another person for services rendered (not being professional services) orfor any services in the course of buying or se lling of g oods or in relation to any transaction relating
to any asset, valuable article or thing, not being securities;
(ii) the  expression  "professional services"  means se rvices rendered  by  a  person  in  the  course  of
carrying  on  a  legal,  medical,  engineering  or  architectural  profession  or  the  profession  of
accountancy or technical consultancy or interior de coration or such other profession as is notified
by the Board for the purposes of section 44AA;
(iii) the expression "securities" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) ;
(iv) where any income is credited to any account, whether called "Suspense account" or by any other
name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be
deemed to be credit of such income to the acc ount of the payee and the provisions of this section
shall apply accordingly.

85. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
662 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
86-87 . Sub. for "fifteen" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Rent.
194-I.  Any person, not being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, who is res ponsible for paying to a
resident any income by way of rent, shall, at the time of credit of such income to the account of the payee or
at the time of payment thereof in cash or by the issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever
is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of—
(a) two per cent for the use of any machinery or plant or equipment; and
(b) ten per cent for the use of any land or building (i ncluding factory building) or land appurtenant to a
building (including factory building) or furniture or fittings:
88[Provided that no deduction shall be made under this section, where the income by way of rent credited
or paid for a month or part of a month by such person to the account of, or to, the payee, does not exceedfifty thousand rupees: ]
Provided further that  an individual or a  Hindu undivided fa mily,  whose  total sales,  gross  receipts or
turnover from the business or profession carried on by  him exceed one crore rupees in case of business or
fifty lakh rupees in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year inwhich such income by way of rent is credited or paid, shall be liable to deduct income-tax under this section
:
Provided also that no deduction shall be made under this section where the income by way of rent is
credited or paid to a business trust, being a real estate investment trust, in respect of any real estate asset,referred to in clause ( 23FCA ) of section 10, owned directly by such business trust.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "rent" means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, tenancy or any
other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either separately or together) any,—
(a) land; or
(b) building (including factory building); or
(c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or
(d) machinery; or
(e) plant; or
(f) equipment; or
(g) furniture; or
(h)f i t t i n g s ,
whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee;
(ii) where any income is credited to any account, whether called "Suspense account" or by any other
name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall bedeemed to be credit of such income to the acc ount of the payee and the provisions of this section
shall apply accordingly.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
663 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

88. Sub. by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Prior to its substitution, the first proviso, as amended by
Act No. 14 of 2010, w.e.f. 1-7-2010 and Act No. 7 of 2019, w.e.f. 1-4-2019, read as under:
"Provided  that no deduction shall be made under this section where the amount of such income or, as
the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid or likely to be credited
or paid during the financial year by the aforesaid person to the account of, or to, the payee, does not
exceed two hundred and forty thousand rupees."
Payment on transfer of certain immovable property other than agricultural land.
194-IA.  (1) Any person, being a transferee, responsible fo r paying (other than the person referred to in
section 194LA) to a resident transferor any sum by way of consideration for transfer of any immovable
property (other than agricultural land), shall, at  the  time  of credit of such sum to the  account  of the
transferor or at the time of payment of such sum in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other
mode, whichever is earlier, deduct an amount equal to one per cent of such sum or the stamp duty value of
such property, whichever is higher, as income-tax thereon.
(2) No deduction under sub-section (1) shall be  made  where  the  consideration for the  transfer of an
immovable property and the stamp duty value of such property, are both, less than fifty lakh rupees:
89[Provided that where there is more  than one transferor or transferee in respect of any immovable
property, then the consideration shall be the aggregate of the amounts paid or payable by all the transferees
to the transferor or all the transferors for transfer of such immovable property.]
(3) The provisions of section 203A shall not apply to a person required to deduct tax in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "agricultural land" means agricultural land in Indi a, not being a land situate in any area referred to
in items ( a) and ( b) of sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( 14) of section 2;
(aa) "consideration for transfer of any immovable property" shall include all charges of the nature of
club membership fee, car parking fee, electricity or water facility fee, maintenance fee, advance
fee  or  any  other  charges of  similar  nature,  which  are  incidental to  transfer  of  the  immovableproperty;
(b) "immovable property" means any land (other than ag ricultural land) or any building or part of a
building;
(c) "stamp duty value" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( f) of the Explanation  to
clause ( vii) of sub-section (2) of section 56.

89. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
664 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Payment of rent b y certain individuals or Hindu undivided famil y.
194-IB.  (1) Any person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily (other than those referred to in the
second proviso to section 194-I), responsible for paying  to a resident any income by way of rent exceeding
fifty thousand rupees for a month or part of a month during the previous year, shall deduct an amount equal
to 90[two] per cent of such income as income-tax thereon.
(2) The income-tax referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deducted on such income at the time of credit of
rent, for the last month of the previous year or the la st month of tenancy, if the property is vacated during
the year, as the case may be, to the account of the pa yee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by
issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
(3) The provisions of section 203A shall not apply to a person required to deduct tax in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(4) In a case where the  tax is required to be de ducted as per the provisions of section 206AA, such
deduction shall not exceed the amount of rent payable fo r the last month of the previous year or the last
month of the tenancy, as the case may be.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, "rent" means any payment, by whatever name called, under
any lease, sub-lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of any land or building or
both.

90. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-10-2024.
Payment under specified agreement.
194-IC.  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 194-IA, any person responsible for paying to a
resident any sum by way of consideration, not being consideration in kind, under the agreement referred to
in sub-section (5A) of section 45, shall at the time of cr edit of such sum to the account of the payee or at the
time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a che que or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier,
deduct an amount equal to ten per cent of such sum as income-tax thereon.
Fees for professional or technical services.

194J.  (1) Any person, not being an individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily, who is res ponsible for paying to
a resident any sum by way of—
(a) fees for professional services, or
(b) fees for technical services, or
(ba) any remuneration or fees or commission by whatev er name called, other than those on which tax is
deductible under section 192, to a director of a company, or
(c) royalty, orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
665 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(d) any sum referred to in clause ( va) of section 28,
shall, at the time of credit of such sum to the account  of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash
or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier, deduct an amount equal to two
per cent of such sum in case of fees for technical services (not being a professional services), or royaltywhere such royalty is in the nature of consideration for sale, distribution or exhibition of cinematographic
films and ten per cent of such sum in other cases, as income-tax on income comprised therein :
Provided  that no deduction shall be made under this section—
(A) from any sums as aforesaid credited or paid before the 1st day of July, 1995; or
(B) where the amount of such sum or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such sums
credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the financial year by the aforesaid person tothe account of, or to, the payee, does not exceed—
(i)
91[fifty] thousand rupees, in the case of fees for professional services referred to in clause
(a), or
(ii)91[fifty] thousand rupees, in the case of fees for technical services referred to in clause ( b),
or
(iii)91[fifty] thousand rupees, in the case of royalty referred to in clause ( c), or
(iv)91[fifty] thousand rupees, in the case of sum referred to in clause ( d) :
Provided further that  an individual or a  Hindu undivided fa mily,  whose  total sales,  gross  receipts or
turnover from the business or profession carried on by  him exceed one crore rupees in case of business or
fifty lakh rupees in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year inwhich such sum by way of fees for professional services  or technical services is credited or paid, shall be
liable to deduct income-tax under this section :
Provided also that no individual or a Hindu undivided fa mily referred to in the second proviso shall be liable
to deduct income-tax on the sum by way of fees for professional services in case such sum is credited orpaid exclusively for personal purposes of such individual or any member of Hindu undivided fa mily:
Provided also  that the provisions of this section shall have effect, as if for the words "ten per cent", the
words "two per cent" had been substituted in the case  of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation
of call centre.
(2) [***](3) [***]Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "professional services" means services rendered by a person in the course of carrying on legal,
medical, engineering or architectural profession or the  profession of accountancy or technicalconsultancy or interior decoration or advertising or such other profession as is notified by the
Board for the purposes of section 44AA or of this section;
(b) "fees for technical services" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2  to clause ( vii) of
sub-section (1) of section 9;
(ba) "royalty" shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to clause ( vi) of sub-section (1) of
section 9;
(c) where any sum referred to in sub-section (1) is credited to any account, whether called "suspense
account" or by any other name, in the books of account of the person liable to pay such sum, such
crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such sum to the account of the payee and the provisions ofthis section shall apply accordingly.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
666 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

91. Sub. for "thirty" Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Income in respect of units.

194K.  Any person responsible for paying to a resident any income in respect of—
(a) units of a Mutual Fund specified under clause ( 23D) of section 10; or
(b) units from the Administrator of the specified undertaking; or
(c) units from the specified company,
shall, at the time of credit of such income to the a ccount of the payee or at the time of payment thereof by
any mode, whichever is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rate of ten per cent:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply—
(i) where the amount of such income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such
income credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the financial year by the person
responsible for making the payment to the account of, or to, the payee does not exceed 92[ten]
thousand rupees; or
(ii) if the income is of the nature of capital gains.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator as referred to in clause ( a) of section 2 of the Unit Trust
of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002);
(b) "specified company" means a company as referred to in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Unit Trust of
India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002);
(c) "specified undertaking" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( i) of section 2 of the Unit
Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58 of 2002).
Explanation 2.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that where any income referred to in this
section is credited to any account, whether called "s uspense account" or by any other name, in the books of
account of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be the credit of such
income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.

92. Sub. for "five" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
Payment of compensation on acquisition of capital asset.