39. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Appearance by registered valuer in certain matters.

287A.  Any assessee who is entitled or required to attend before any income-tax authority or the Appellate
Tribunal in connection with any matter relating to the valuation of any asset, otherwise than when required
under section 131 to attend personally for examination on  oath or affirmation, may attend by a registered
valuer.
Explanation. —In this section, "registered valuer" has the same meaning as in clause ( oaa) of section 2 of
the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957).
Appearance by authorised representative.

288. (1) Any assessee who is entitled or required to attend before any income-tax authority or the Appellate
Tribunal in connection with any proceeding under this Act otherwise than when required under section 131
to attend personally for examination on oath or affirmation, may, subject to the other provisions of thissection, attend by an authorised representative.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
860 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(2) For the purposes of this section, "authorised representative" means a person authorised by the assessee i n
writing to appear on his behalf, being—
(i) a person related to the assessee in any manner, or a person regularly employed by the assessee; or
(ii) any officer of a Scheduled Bank with which the assessee maintains a current account or has other
regular dealings; or
(iii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practise in any civil court in India; or
(iv) an accountant; or
(v) any person who has passed any accountancy examination recognised in this behalf by the Board;
or
(vi) any person who has acquired such educational qualifications as the Board may prescribe for this
purpose; or
(via) any person who, before the coming into force of this Act in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli, Goa, Daman and Diu, or Pondicherry, attended before an income-tax authority in the said
territory on behalf of any assessee otherwise than in  the capacity of an employee or relative of that
assessee; or
(vii) any other person who, immediately before  the  commencement  of this Act, was an income-tax
practitioner  within  the  meaning of  clause  ( iv)  of  sub-section  (2)  of  section 61 of  the  Indian
Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), and was actually practising as such;
(viii) any other person as may be prescribed.
Explanation. —In this section, "accountant" means a  chartered accountant  as defined in clause  ( b) o f
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the  Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) who holds a  valid
certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of sectio n 6 of that Act, but does not include [except for the
purposes of representing the assessee under sub-section (1)]—
(a) in case of an assessee, being a company, the pe rson who is not eligible for appointment as an
auditor of the said company in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 141 ofthe Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or
(b) in any other case,—
(i) the assessee himself or in case of the assesse e, being a firm or association of persons or
Hindu undivided fa mily,  any  partner of  the  firm,  or  member of the  association  or  the
family;
(ii) in case of the assessee, being a trust or instit ution, any person referred to in clauses ( a),
(b), (c) and ( cc) of sub-section (3) of section 13;
(iii) in case of any person other than persons referred to in sub-clauses ( i) and ( ii), the person
who is competent to verify the return under section 139 in accordance with the provisionsof section 140;
(iv) any relative of any of the persons referred to in sub-clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii);
(v) an officer or employee of the assessee;
(vi
) an individual who is a partner, or who is in the employment, of an officer or employee of
the assessee;
(vii) an individual who, or his relative or partner—
(I) is holding any security of, or interest in, the assessee:
Provided that the relative may hold security or interest in the assessee of the face
value not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees;
(II) is indebted to the assessee:INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
861 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Provided that the relative may be indebted to the assessee for an amount not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees;
(III) has  given  a  guarantee  or  provided  any  security  in  connection  with  the
indebtedness of any third person to the assessee:
Provided  that  the  relative  may  give  guarantee  or  provide  any  security  in
connection with  the  indebtedness of any third person to  the  assessee  for an
amount not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees;
(viii) a person who, whether directly or indirect ly, has business relationship with the assessee of
such nature as may be prescribed;
(ix) a person who has been convicted by a court of an offence involving fraud and a period of
ten years has not elapsed from the date of such conviction.
(3) [***]
(4) No person—
(a) who has been dismissed or removed from Government service after the 1st day of April, 1938; or
(b) who has been convicted of an offence connected with any income-tax proceeding or on whom a
penalty has been imposed under this Act, other than a penalty imposed on him under clause ( ii) of
sub- section (1) of section 271 or clause ( d) of sub-section (1) of section 272A; or
(c) who has become an insolvent; or
(d) who has been convicted by a court for an offence involving fraud,
shall be qualified to represent an assessee under sub-sectio n (1), for all times in the case of a person referred
to in clause ( a), for such time as the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal
Commissioner or Commissioner may by order determine in the case of a person referred to in clause ( b), for
the period during which the insolvency continues in the case of a person referred to in clause ( c), and for a
period of ten years from the date of conviction in the case of a person referred to in clause ( d).
(5) If any person—
(a) who is a  legal practitioner or an accountant is found guilty of misconduct in his professional
capacity by any authority entitled to institute disciplinary proceedings against him, an order passedby that authority shall have effect in relation to his right to attend before an income-tax authority as
it has in relation to his right to practise as a legal practitioner or accountant, as the case may be;
(b) who is not a legal practitioner or an accountant, is found guilty of misconduct in connection with
any income-tax proceedings by the prescribed author ity, the prescribed authority may direct that he
shall thenceforth be disqualified to represent an assessee under sub-section (1).
(6) Any order or direction under clause ( b) of sub-section (4) or clause ( b) of sub-section (5) shall be subject
to the following conditions, namely :—
(a) no such order or direction shall be made in re spect of any person unless he has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard;
(b) any person against whom any such order or direct ion is made may, within one month of the making
of the order or direction, appeal to the Board to have the order or direction cancelled; and
(c) no such order or direction shall take effect unt il the expiration of one month from the making
thereof, or, where an appeal has been preferred, until the disposal of the appeal.
(7) A person disqualified to represent an assessee by virtue of the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 61
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), shall be disqualified to represent an assessee undersub-section (1).
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, "relative" in relation to an individual, means—
(a) spouse of the individual;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
862 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) brother or sister of the individual;
(c) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(d) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;
(e) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
(f) spouse of a person referred to in clause ( b), clause ( c), clause ( d) or clause ( e);
(g) any lineal descendant of a brother or sister of either the individual or the spouse of the individual.
Rounding off of income.

288A.  The amount of total income computed in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Act shall be
rounded off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees and for this purpose any part of a rupee consisting of paise
shall be ignored and thereafter if such amount is not a multiple of ten, then, if the last figure in that amount is
five or more, the amount shall be increased to the next higher amount which is a multiple of ten and if the
last figure is less than five, the amount shall be reduc ed to the next lower amount which is a multiple of ten;
and the amount so rounded off shall be deemed to be the total income of the assessee for the purposes of
this Act.
Rounding off amount payable and refund due.

288B.  Any amount payable, and the amount of refund due , under the provisions of this Act shall be rounded
off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees and fo r this purpose any part of a rupee consisting of paise shall be
ignored and thereafter if such amount is not a multiple of ten, then, if the last figure in that amount is five ormore, the amount shall be increased to the next higher amount which is a multiple of ten and if the last figure
is less than five, the amount shall be reduced to the next lower amount which is a multiple of ten.
Receipt to be given.

289. A receipt shall be given for any money paid or recovered under this Act.
Indemnity.

290. Every person deducting, retaining, or paying any tax in pursuance of this Act in respect of income
belonging to another person is hereby indemnified for the deduction, retention, or payment thereof.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
863 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Power to tender immunit y from prosecution .

291. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of opini on (the reasons for such opinion being recorded in
writing) that with a view to obtaining the  evidence  of any person appearing to have  been directly orindirectly concerned in or privy to the concealment of  income or to the evasion of payment of tax on income
it is necessary or expedient so to do, tender to such person immunity from prosecution for any offence under
this Act or under the Indian Penal Code
* (45 of 1860), or under any other Central Act for the time being in
force and also from the imposition of any penalty under this Act on condition of his making a full and truedisclosure of the whole circumstances relating to the concealment of income or evasion of payment of tax
on income.
(2) A tender of immunity made to, and accepted by, the pe rson concerned, shall, to the extent to which the
immunity extends, render him immune from prosecution for any offence in respect of which the tender wasmade or from the imposition of any penalty under this Act.
(3) If it appears to the Central Government that any person to whom immunity has been tendered under this
section has not complied with the condition on which th e tender was made or is wilfully concealing anything
or is giving false evidence, the Central Government ma y record a finding to that effect, and thereupon the
immunity shall be deemed to have been withdrawn, and any such person may be tried for the offence in
respect of which the tender of immunity was made or for any other offence of which he appears to have
been guilty in connection with the same matter and shall also become liable to the imposition of any penaltyunder this Act to which he would otherwise have been liable.
*Vide Notification No. S.O. 2790(E), dated 16-7-2024, now read as Act No. 45 of 2023".
Cognizance of offences.

292. No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any
offence under this Act.
Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973†, and the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, not
to apply.

292A.  Nothing contained in section 360
40 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or in the
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), shall a pply to a person convicted of an offence under this
Act unless that person is under eighteen years of age.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
864 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

40.Vide  Notification No. S.O. 2790(E), dated 16-7-2024. For text of section 401 of Act No. 46 of 2023.
†Vide Notification No. S.O. 2790(E), dated 16-7-2024, now read as Act No. 46 of 2023".
Return of income, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds.

292B.  No return of income, assessment, notice, summons or other proceeding, furnished or made or issued
or taken or purported to have been furnished or made  or issued or taken in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act shall be invalid or shall be deemed to be invalid merely by reason of any mistake,defect or omission in such return of income, assessmen t, notice, summons or other proceeding if such return
of income, assessment, notice, summons or other proceed ing is in substance and effect in conformity with or
according to the intent and purpose of this Act.
Notice deemed to be valid in certain circumstances.

292BB.  Where an assessee has appeared in any proceeding or co-operated in any inquiry relating to an
assessment or reassessment, it shall be deemed that any notice under any provision of this Act, which isrequired to be served upon him, has been duly served upon him in time in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and such assessee shall be precluded from ta king any objection in any proceeding or inquiry under
this Act that the notice was—
(a) not served upon him; or
(b) not served upon him in time; or
(c) served upon him in an improper manner:
Provided  that nothing contained in this section shall apply where the assessee has raised such objection
before the completion of such assessment or reassessment.
Presumption as to assets, books of account, etc..

292C.  (1) Where any books of account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable article
or thing are or is found in the possession or control of  any person in the course of a search under section 132
or survey under section 133A, it may, in any proceeding under this Act, be presumed—
(i) that such books of account, other documents, money, bu llion, jewellery or other valuable article or
thing belong or belongs to such person;
(ii) that the contents of such books of account and other documents are true; and
(iii) that the signature and every other part of such books of account and other documents which
purport to be in the handwriting of any particular person or which may reasonably be assumed to
have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, are in that person'shandwriting, and in the case of a document stamped, executed or attested, that it was duly stamped
and executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed or attested.
(2) Where any books of account, other documents or assets have been delivered to the requisitioning officerINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
865 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
in accordance with the provisions of section 132A, then, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply as if
such books of account, other documents or assets which had been taken into custody from the person
referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c), as the case may be, of sub-section (1) of section 132A,
had been found in the possession or control of that person in the course of a search under section 132.
Authorisation and assessment in case of search or requisition.

292CC.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
(i) it shall not be necessary to issue an authorisation under section 132 or make a requisition under
section 132A separately in the name of each person;
(ii) where an authorisation under section 132 has been issued or requisition under section 132A has
been made mentioning therein the name of more  than one person, the mention of such names of
more than one person on such authorisation or requisition shall not be deemed to construe that it
was issued in the name of an association of persons or body of individuals consisting of suchpersons.
(2) Notwithstanding that an authorisation under section 132 has been issued or requisition under section
132A has been made mentioning therein the name of more than one person, the assessment or reassessment
shall be made separately in the name of each of the persons mentioned in such authorisation or requisition.
Bar of suits in civil courts.

293. No suit shall be brought in any civil court to set aside or modify any proceeding taken or order made
under this Act; and no prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie against the Government or any officer
of the Government for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
P o w e r t o m a k e e x e m p t i o n , e t c . , i n r e l a t i o n t o p a r t i c i p a t i o n i n t h e b u s i n e s s o f p r o s p e c t i n g f o r ,
extraction, etc., of mineral oils.

293A.  (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public
interest, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make an exemption, reduction in rate or othermodification in respect of income-tax in favour of any class of persons specified in sub-section (2) or in
regard to the whole or any part of the income of such class of persons or in regard to the status in which
such class of persons or the members thereof are to be assessed on their income from the business referredto in clause ( a) of sub-section (2) :
Provided  that  the  notification for  modification in respect  of the  status may be  given effect  from an
assessment year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 1993.
(2) The persons referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely :—
(a) persons with whom the Central Government has entered into agreements for the association or
participation of that Government or any person authorised by that Government in any businessINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
866 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
consisting of the prospecting for or extraction or production of mineral oils;
(b) persons providing any  services or  facilities or  s upplying any ship, aircraft, machinery or plant
(whether by way of sale or hire) in connection with any business consisting of the prospecting for
or extraction or production of mineral oils carried on by that Government or any person specified
by that Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette; and
(c) employees of the persons referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b).
(3) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "mineral oil" includes petroleum and natural gas;
(b) "status" means the category under which the asse ssee is assessed as "individual", "Hindu undivided
family" and so on.
Power of Central Government or Board to condone delays in obtaining approval.

293B.  Where, under any provision of this Act, the a pproval of the Central Government or the Board is
required to be obtained before a specified date, it sh all be open to the Central Government or, as the case
may be, the Board to condone, for sufficient cause, any delay in obtaining such approval.
Power to withdraw approval.

293C.  Where the Central Government or the Board or an  income-tax authority, who has been conferred
upon  the  power  under  any  provision  of  this Act  to  grant  any  approval to  any  assessee,  the  Central
Government or the Board or such authority may, notwith standing that a provision to withdraw such approval
has not been specifically provided for in such provision, withdraw such approval at any time :
Provided that the Central Government or Board or income-tax authority shall, after giving a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed withdrawal to the assessee concerned, at any time,
withdraw the approval after recording the reasons for doing so.
Faceless approval or registration.

293D.  (1) The Central Government may make a scheme, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the
purposes of granting approval or registration, as the  case  may be, by income-tax authority under any
provision of the Act, so as to impart greater efficiency, transparency and accountab ility by—
(a) eliminating the interface between the income-tax authorities and the assessee or any other person
to the extent technologically feasible;
(b) optimising utilisation of the resources through ec onomies of scale and functional specialisation;
(c) introducing a team-based grant of approval or registration, with dynamic jurisdiction.
(2) The Central Government may, for the purpose of givi ng effect to the scheme made under sub-section (1),INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
867 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an y of the provisions of this Act shall not apply or shal l
apply with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that no direction shall be issued after the 31st day of March, 2022.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may be after the
notification is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Act to have effect pending legislative provision for charge of tax.

294. If on the 1st day of April in any assessment year provision has not yet been made by a Central Act for
the charging of income-tax for that assessment year, this Act shall nevertheless have effect until such
provision is so made as if the provision in force in the preceding assessment year or the provision proposedin the Bill then before Parliament, whichever is more fa vourable to the assessee, were actually in force.
Power to make exemption, etc., in relation to certain Union territories.

294A.  If the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient so to do for avoiding any hardship or
anomaly or removing any difficulty that may arise as a result of the application of this Act to the Union
territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry, or in the case of the Union
territory of Pondicherry, for implementing any provision of the Treaty of Cession concluded between Franceand India on the 28th day of May, 1956, that Govern ment may, by general or special order, make an
exemption, reduction in rate or other modification in  respect of income-tax or super-tax in favour of any
assessee or class of assessees or in regard to the whole or any part of the income of any assessee or class ofassessees :
Provided  that the power conferred by this section shal l not be exercisable after the 31st day of March,
1967, except for the purpose of rescinding an exemption, reduction or modification already made.
Power to make rules.

295. (1) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Government, by notification in the Gazette of
India, make rules for the whole or any part of India for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for
all or any of the following matters :—
(a) the ascertainment and determination of any class of income;
(b) the manner in which and the procedure by which the income shall be arrived at in the case of—
(i) income derived in part from agriculture and in part from business;
(ii) persons residing outside India;
(iia) operations carried out in India by a non-resident;
(iib) transactions or activities of a non-resident;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
868 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iii) an individual who is liable to be assessed under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section
64;
(c) the determination of the value of any perquisite chargeable to tax under this Act in such manner
and on such basis as appears to the Board to be proper and reasonable;
(d) the percentage on the written down value which may be allowed as depreciation in respect of
buildings, machinery, plant or furniture;
(dd) the extent to which, and the conditions subject to  which, any expenditure referred to in sub-section
(3) of section 37 may be allowed;
(dda) the matters specified in sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 44AA;
(e) the conditions or limitations subject to which any payment of rent made by an assessee shall be
deducted under section 80GG;
(ee) the matters specified in Chapter X-A;
(eea) the cases, the nature and value of assets, the limits and heads of expenditure and the outgoings,
which are required to be prescribed under sub-section (6) of section 139;
(eeb) the time within which any person may apply for the allotment of a permanent account number, the
form and  the  manner  in  which  such  application  may  be  made  and  the  particulars which  such
application shall contain and the transactions with respect to which permanent account numbersshall be quoted on documents relating to such transactions under section 139A;
(eeba ) the documents, statements, receipts, certificates or audited reports which may not be furnished
along with the return but shall be produced befo re the Assessing Officer on demand under section
139C;
(eebb ) the class or classes of persons who shall be required to furnish the return of income in electronic
form;  the  form and  the  manner  of  furnishing the  said  return  in  electronic  form;  documents,statements, receipts, certificates or reports which shall not be furnished with the return in electronic
form and the computer resource or electronic record to which such return may be transmitted
under section 139D;
(eec)the form of the report of audit 
41-42[or inventory valuation] and the particulars which such report
shall contain under sub-section (2A) of section 142;
(eed) remuneration of Chairperson and members of the Approving Panel under sub-section (18) and
procedure and manner for constitution of, functioni ng and disposal of references by, the Approving
Panel under sub-section (21) of section 144BA;
(f) the manner in which and the period to which any such income as is referred to in section 180 may
be allocated;
(fa) the form and manner in which the information re lating to payment of any sum may be furnished
under sub-section (6) of section 195;
(g) the authority to be prescribed for any of the purposes of this Act;
(h) the procedure for giving effect to the terms of any agreement for the granting of relief in respect of
double taxation or for the avoidance of double taxati on which may be entered into by the Central
Government under this Act;
(ha) the procedure for granting of relief or deduction, as  the case may be, of any income-tax paid in any
country or specified territory outside India, under section 90 or section 90A or section 91, against
the income-tax payable under this Act;
(i) the  form and  manner  in  which  any  application,  claim,  return  or  information  may  be  made  or
furnished and the fees that may be levied in respect of any application or claim;
(j) the manner in which any document required to be filed under this Act may be verified;
(k) the procedure to be followed on applications for refunds;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
869 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(kk) the procedure to be followed in calculating interest payable by assessees or interest payable by
Government to assessees under any provision of this Act, including the rounding off of the periodfor which such interest  is to be calculated in cases where such period includes a fraction of a
month, and specifying the circumstances in which and the extent to which petty amounts of interest
payable by assessees may be ignored;
(l) the regulation of any matter for which provision is made in section 230;
(m) the form and manner in which any appeal or cross-objection may be filed under this Act, the fee
payable in respect thereof and the manner in which in timation of any such order as is referred to in
clause ( c) of sub-section (2) of section 249 may be served;
(mm) the  circumstances  in  which,  the  conditions  subject  to  which  and  the  manner  in  which,  the
41-42[Joint Commissioner (Appeals) or the] Commissioner (Appeals) may permit an appellant to
produce evidence which he did not produce or which he was not allowed to produce before theAssessing Officer;
(mma ) the form in which the statement under section 285B shall be delivered to the Assessing Officer;
(n) the maintenance of a register of persons other th an legal practitioners or accountants as defined in
sub-section (2) of section 288 practising before income-tax authorities and for the constitution of
and the procedure to be followed by the authority referred to in sub-section (5) of that section;
(o) the issue of certificate verifying the payment of tax by assessees;
(p) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) In cases coming under clause ( b) of sub-section (2), where the income liable to tax cannot be definitely
ascertained, or can be ascertained only with an amount of trouble and expense to the assessee which in the
opinion of the Board is unreasonable, the rules made under this section may—
(a) prescribe methods by which an estimate of such income may be made; and
(b) in cases coming under sub-clause ( i) of clause ( b) of sub-section (2) specify the proportion of the
income which shall be deemed to be income liable to tax,
and an assessment based on such estimate or proportion shall be deemed to be duly made in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.
(4) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective effect,
from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the rules or any of them and, unless
the contrary is permitted (whether expressly or by necessary implication), no retrospective effect shall be
given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of assessees.
41-42.  Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Rules and certain notifications to be placed before Parliament.

296. The Central Government shall cause every rule made under this Act, the rules of procedure framed by
the Settlement Commission under sub-section (7) of section 245F, the Authority for Advance Rulings under
section 245V and the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (5) of section 255 and every notification issuedbefore the 1st day of June, 2007 under sub-clause ( iv) of clause ( 23C) of section 10 and every notificationINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
870 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
issued under sub-section (1C) of section 139 or third proviso to sub-section (1) of section 153A or second
proviso to sub-section (1) of section 153C to be laid as soon as may be after the rule is made or the
notification is issued before each House of Parliament wh ile it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry ofthe session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should
not be made or issued, that rule or notification shall thereafter have effect, only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.
Repeals and savings.

297. (1) The Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922) (hereinafter referred to as
the repealed Act),—
(a) where a return of income has been filed before  the commencement of this Act by any person for
any assessment year, proceedings for the assessment of  that person for that year may be taken and
continued as if this Act had not been passed;
(b) where a return of income is filed after the commencement of this Act otherwise than in pursuance
of a notice under section 34 of the repealed Act by any person for the assessment year ending on
the 31st day of March, 1962, or any earlier year, the assessment of that person for that year shall
be made in accordance with the procedure specified in this Act;
(c) any proceeding pending on the commencement of this Act before any income-tax authority, the
Appellate Tribunal or any court, by way of appeal, reference, or revision, shall be continued anddisposed of as if this Act had not been passed;
(d) where in respect of any assessment year after the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1940,—
(i) a notice under section 34 of the repealed Act had been issued before the commencement
of this Act, the proceedings in pursuance of such notice may be continued and disposed of
as if this Act had not been passed;
(ii) any  income  chargeable  to  tax  had  escaped  assessment  within  the  meaning of  that
expression in section 147 and no proceedi ngs under section 34 of the repealed Act in
respect of any such income are pending at the commencement of this Act, a notice under
section 148 may, subject to the provisions contained in section 149 or section 150, beissued with respect to that assessment year and all the provisions of this Act shall apply
accordingly;
(e) subject to the provisions of clause ( g) and clause ( j) of this sub-section, section 23A of the repealed
Act shall continue to have effect in relation to the assessment of any company or its shareholders
for the  assessment year ending on the  31st day of March, 1962 or any earlier year, and the
provisions of the repealed Act shall apply to all matters arising out of such assessment as fully andeffectually as if this Act had not been passed;
(f) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of any assessment completed before the
first day of April, 1962, may be initiated and any such penalty may be imposed as if this Act hadnot been passed;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
871 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(g) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of any assessment for the year ending on
the 31st day of March, 1962, or any earlier year, which is completed on or after the 1st day of
April, 1962, may be initiated and any such penalty may be imposed under this Act;
(h) any election or declaration made or option exercised by an assessee under any provision of the
repealed Act and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed tohave been an election or declaration made or option exercised under the corresponding provision
of this Act;
(i) where, in respect of any assessment completed before the commencement of this Act, a refund
falls due after such commencement or default is made after such commencement in the payment of
any sum due under such completed assessment, the provisions of this Act relating to interest
payable by the Central Government on refunds and interest payable by the assessee for defaultshall apply;
(j) any sum payable by way of income-tax, super-tax, interest, penalty or otherwise under the repealed
Act may be recovered under this Act, but without prejudice to any action already taken for therecovery of such sum under the repealed Act;
(k) any agreement entered into, appointment made, approval given, recognition granted, direction,
instruction, notification, order or rule issued under any provision of the repealed Act shall, so far asit is not inconsistent with the corresponding provision  of this Act, be deemed to have been entered
into, made, granted, given or issued under the co rresponding provision aforesaid and shall continue
in force accordingly;
(l) any notification issued under sub-section (1) of s ection 60 or section 60A of the repealed Act and
in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, to the extent to which provision
has not been made under this Act, continue in force:
Provided  that the Central Government may rescind any such notification or amend it so as to
rescind any exemption, reduction in rate or other modification made thereunder;
(m) where the period prescribed for any application, appeal, reference or revision under the repealed
Act had expired on or before the commencement of this Act, nothing in this Act shall be construed
as enabling any such application, appeal, reference or revision to be made under this Act by reason
only of the fact that a longer period therefor is prescribed or provision is made for extension oftime in suitable cases by the appropriate authority.
Power to remove difficulties.

298. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act the Central Government may, by
general or special order, do anything not  inconsiste nt  with such provisions which appears to it  to be
necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing power, any such order may provide
for  the  adaptations or  modifications subject  to  which  the  repealed  Act  shall apply  in  relation  to  the
assessments for the assessment year ending on the 31st day of March, 1962, or any earlier year.
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act as amended by the Direct Tax Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1987, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such
provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty:
Provided  that no such order shall be made after the expi ration of three years from the 1st day of April,

1988.
(4) Every order made under sub-section (3) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
872 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
INSURANCE BUSINESS
[See section 44]
A.—Life insurance business
Profits of life insurance business to be computed separately.

1. In the case of a person who carries on or at any time in the previous year carried on life insurance
business, the profits and gains of such person from that business shall be computed separately from his
profits and gains from any other business.
Computation of profits of life insurance business.

2. The profits and gains of life insurance business shal l be taken to be the annual average of the surplus
arrived at by adjusting the surplus or deficit disclose d by the actuarial valuation made in accordance with the
Insurance  Act,  1938  (4  of  1938),  in  respect  of  the  last  inter-valuation  period  ending  before  the
commencement of the assessment year, so as to exclude from it any surplus or deficit included therein which
was made in any earlier inter-valuation period:
43[Provided that any expenditure which is not admissible under section 37 in computing the profits and
gains of a business, shall be included to the profits and gains of life insurance business. ]
Deductions.

3. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1976, w .e.f. 1-4-1977. Earlier, the rule was first amended by the Finance
Act, 1966, w .e.f. 1-4-1966 and by the Finance Act, 1965, w .e.f. 1-4-1965. ]
Adjustment of tax paid by deduction at source.

4. Where for any year an assessment of the profits of lif e insurance business is made in accordance with the
annual average of a surplus disclosed by a valuation for an inter-valuation period exceeding twelve months,
then, in computing the income-tax payable for that year, credit shall not be given in accordance with section
199 for the income-tax paid in the previous year, but credit shall be given for the annual average of the
income-tax paid by deduction at source from interest on securities or otherwise during such period.
B.—Other insurance business
Computation of profits and gains of other insurance business.

5. The profits and gains of any business of insurance othe r than life insurance shall be taken to be the profit
before tax and appropriations as disclosed in the profit and loss account prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) or the rules made thereunder or the provisions of theInsurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act,  1999 (4 of 1999) or the regulations made thereunder,
subject to the following adjustments:—
(a) subject to the other provisions of this rule, any expenditure or allowance including any amount
debited to the profit and loss account either by wa y of a provision for any tax, dividend, reserve or
any other provision as may be prescribed which is not admissible under the provisions of sections
30 to 43B in computing the profits and gains of a business shall be added back;
(b)(i) any gain or loss on realisation of investments shall be added or deducted, as the case may be, if
such gain or loss is not credited or debited to the profit and loss account;
(ii) any provision for diminution in the value of investment debited to the profit and loss account,
shall be added back;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
873 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c) such amount carried over to a reserve for unexpired risks as may be prescribed in this behalf shall
be allowed as a deduction:
Provided  that any sum payable by the assessee under section 43B, which is added back in accordance with
clause ( a) of this rule, shall be allowed as deduction in  computing the income under the said rule in the
previous year in which such sum is actually paid.
C.—Other provisions
Profits and gains of non-resident person.

6. (1) The profits and gains of the branches in India of  a person not resident in India and carrying on any
business of insurance, may, in the absence of more reliable data, be deemed to be that proportion of the
world income of such person which corresponds to the proportion which his premium income derived from
India bears to his total premium income.
(2) For the purposes of this rule, the world income in  relation to life insurance business of a person not
resident in India shall be computed in the manner laid  down in this Act for the computation of the profits
and gains of life insurance business carried on in India.
Interpretation.

7. (1) For the purposes of these rules—
(i) [***]
(ii) "investments" includes securities, stocks and shares;
(iii) [***]
(iv) "life insurance business" means life insurance business as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the
Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) ;
(v) "rule" means a rule contained in this Schedule.
(2) References in these rules to the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938), or any provision thereof, shall, in
relation to the Life Insurance Corporation of India, be construed as references to that Act or provision as
read with section 43 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956).

43. Ins. by Act No. 15 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 .
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
PROCEDURE FOR RECOVERY OF TAX
[See sections 222 and 276]
PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Definitions.

1. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "certificate", except in rules 7, 44, 65 and sub-rule (2) of rule 66, means the certificate drawn up by
the Tax Recovery Officer under section 222 in respect of any assessee referred to in that section;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
874 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) "defaulter" means the assessee mentioned in the certificate;
(c) "execution", in relation to a certificate, means recovery of arrears in pursuance of the certificate;
(d) "movable property" includes growing crops;
(e) "officer" means a person authorised to make an attachment or sale under this Schedule;
(f) "rule" means a rule contained in this Schedule; and
(g) "share in a corporation" includes stock, debenture-stock, debentures or bonds.
Issue of notice.

2. When a certificate has been drawn up by the Tax Re covery Officer for the recovery of arrears under this
Schedule, the Tax Recovery Officer shall cause to be served upon the defaulter a notice requiring the
defaulter to pay the amount specified in the certificate within fifteen days from the date of service of the
notice and intimating that in default steps would be taken to realise the amount under this Schedule.
When certificate may be executed.

3. No step in execution of a certificate shall be taken until the period of fifteen days has elapsed since the
date of the service of the notice required by the preceding rule :
Provided  that, if the Tax Recovery Officer is satisfied th at the defaulter is likely to conceal, remove or
dispose of the whole or any part of such of his movable property as would be liable to attachment in
execution of a decree of a civil court and that the realisation of the amount of the certificate would in
consequence be delayed or obstructed, he may at any time direct, for reasons to be recorded in writing, an
attachment of the whole or any part of such property:
Provided further  that  if the  defaulter whose  property has been so attached furnishes security to the
satisfaction of the Tax Recovery Officer, such attachment shall be cancelled from the date on which such
security is accepted by the Tax Recovery Officer.
Mode of recovery.

4. If the amount mentioned in the notice is not paid within the time specified therein or within such further
time as the Tax Recovery Officer may grant in his discretion, the Tax Recovery Officer shall proceed to
realise the amount by one or more of the following modes :—
(a) by attachment and sale of the defaulter's movable property;
(b) by attachment and sale of the defaulter's immovable property;
(c) by arrest of the defaulter and his detention in prison;
(d) by appointing a receiver for the management of the defaulter's movable and immovable properties.
Interest, costs and charges recoverable.

5. There shall be recoverable, in the proceedings in execution of every certificate,—
(a) such interest upon the amount of tax or penalty or other sum to which the certificate relates as is
payable in accordance with sub-section (2) of section 220, and
(b) all charges incurred in respect of—
(i) the service of notice upon the defaulter to pay the arrears, and of warrants and other
processes, and
(ii) all other proceedings taken for realising the arrears.
Purchaser's title.

6. (1) Where property is sold in execution of a certificat e, there shall vest in the purchaser merely the right,
title and interest of the defaulter at the time of the sale, even though the property itself be specified.
(2) Where immovable property is sold in execution of a certificate, and such sale has become absolute, the
purchaser's right, title and interest shall be deemed to have vested in him from the time when the property is
sold, and not from the time when the sale becomes absolute.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
875 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Suit a gainst purchaser not maintainable on ground of purchase bein g made on behalf of plaintiff .

7. (1) No suit shall be maintained against any person claiming title under a purchase certified by the Tax
Recovery Officer in the manner laid down in this Schedule, on the ground that the purchase was made onbehalf of the plaintiff or on behalf of someone through whom the plaintiff claims.
(2) Nothing in this section shall bar a suit to obtain a declaration that the name of any purchaser certified as
aforesaid was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or wi thout the consent of the real purchaser, or interfere
with the right of a third person to proceed against that property, though ostensibly sold to the certifiedpurchaser, on the ground that it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third person against the real owner.
Disposal of proceeds of execution.

8. (1) Whenever assets are realised by sale or otherwise in execution of a certificate, the proceeds shall be
disposed of in the following manner, namely :—
(a) they shall first be adjusted towards the amount due under the certificate in execution of which the
assets were realised and the costs incurred in the course of such execution;
(b) if there remains a balance after the adjustment referred to in clause ( a), the same shall be utilised
for satisfaction of any other amount recoverable from the assessee under this Act which may bedue on the date on which the assets were realised; and
(c) the balance, if any, remaining after the adjustments under clauses ( a) and ( b) shall be paid to the
defaulter.
(2) If the defaulter disputes any adjustment under clause ( b) of sub-rule (1), the Tax Recovery Officer shall
determine the dispute.
General bar to jurisdiction of civil courts, save where fraud alleged.

9. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every question arising between the Tax Recovery
Officer and the defaulter or their representatives, rela ting to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of a
certificate, or relating to the confirmation or setting aside by an order under this Act of a sale held in
execution of such certificate, shall be determined, not by suit, but by order of the Tax Recovery Officer
before whom such question arises :
Provided  that a suit may be brought in a civil court in respect of any such question upon the ground of
fraud.
Property exempt from attachment.

10. (1) All such property as is by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), exempted from attachment
and sale in execution of a decree of a civil court shall be exempt from attachment and sale under this
Schedule.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer's decision as to what property is so entitled to exemption shall be conclusive.Investigation by Tax Recovery Officer.

11. (1) Where any claim is preferred to, or any objection is made to the attachment or sale of, any property
in execution of a certificate, on the ground that such property is not liable to such attachment or sale, the
Tax Recovery Officer shall proceed to investigate the claim or objection :
Provided  that no such investigation shall be made where the Tax Recovery Officer considers that the claim
or objection was designedly or unnecessarily delayed.
(2) Where the  property to which the claim or objectio n applies has been advertised for sale, the Tax
Recovery Officer ordering the sale may postpone it pe nding the investigation of the claim or objection, upon
such terms as to security or otherwise as the Tax Recovery Officer shall deem fit.
(3) The claimant or objector must adduce evidence to show that—
(a) (in the case of immovable property) at the date  of the service of the notice issued under this
Schedule to pay the arrears, orINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
876 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) (in the case of movable property) at the date of the attachment,
he had some interest in, or was possessed of, the property in question.
(4) Where, upon the said investigation, the Tax Recovery Officer is satisfied that, for the reason stated in the
claim or objection, such property was not, at the said date, in the possession of the defaulter or of some
person in trust for him or in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying rent to him, or that, being in
the possession of the defaulter at the said date, it was so in his possession, not on his own account or as his
own property, but on account of or in trust for some  other person, or partly on his own account and partly on
account of some other person, the Tax Recovery Officer shall make an order releasing the property, whollyor to such extent as he thinks fit, from attachment or sale.
(5) Where the Tax Recovery Officer is satisfied that the property was, at the said date, in the possession of
the defaulter as his own property and not on account of  any other person, or was in the possession of some
other person in trust for him, or in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying rent to him, the Tax
Recovery Officer shall disallow the claim.
(6) Where a claim or an objection is preferred, the part y against whom an order is made may institute a suit
in a civil court to establish the right which he claims to the property in dispute; but, subject to the result of
such suit (if any), the order of the Tax Recovery Officer shall be conclusive.
Removal of attachment on satisfaction or cancellation of certificate.

12. Where—
(a) the amount due, with costs and all charges and expenses resulting from the attachment of any
property or incurred in order to hold a sale, are paid to the Tax Recovery Officer, or
(b) the certificate is cancelled,
the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn a nd, in the case of immovable property, the withdrawal
shall, if the defaulter so desires, be proclaimed at his expense, and a copy of the proclamation shall beaffixed in the manner provided by this Schedule for a proclamation of sale of immovable property.
Officer entitled to attach and sell.

13. The attachment and sale of movable property and the attachment and sale of immovable property may
be made by such persons as the Tax Recovery Officer may from time to time direct.
Defaulting purchaser answerable for loss on resale.

14. Any deficiency of price which may happen on a resa le by reason of the purchaser's default, and all
expenses attending such resale, shall be certified to th e Tax Recovery Officer by the officer holding the sale,
and shall, at the instance of either the Tax Recovery  Officer or the defaulter, be recoverable from the
defaulting purchaser under the procedure provided by this Schedule:
Provided  that no such application shall be entertained unless filed within fifteen days from the date of
resale.
Adjournment or stoppage of sale.

15. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may, in his discretion, adjourn any sale hereunder to a specified day and
hour; and the officer conducting any such sale may, in his discretion, adjourn the sale, recording his reasons
for such adjournment :
Provided  that, where the sale is made in, or within the pr ecincts of, the office of the Tax Recovery Officer,
no such adjournment shall be made without the leave of the Tax Recovery Officer.
(2) Where a sale of immovable property is adjourne d under sub-rule (1) for a longer period than one
calendar month, a fresh proclamation of sale under this Schedule shall be made unless the defaulter consents
to waive it.
(3) Every sale shall be stopped if, before the lot is knocked down, the arrears and costs (including the costs
of the sale) are tendered to the officer conducting the sale, or proof is given to his satisfaction that theamount of such arrears and costs has been paid to the Tax Recovery Officer who ordered the sale.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
877 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Private alienation to be void in certain cases .

16. (1) Where a notice has been served on a defaulter under rule 2, the defaulter or his representative in
interest shall not be competent to mortgage, charge, lease or otherwise deal with any property belonging tohim except with the permission of the Tax Recovery  Officer, nor shall any civil court issue any process
against such property in execution of a decree for the payment of money.
(2) Where an attachment has been made under this Schedule, any private transfer or delivery of the property
attached or of any interest therein and any payment to  the defaulter of any debt, dividend or other moneys
contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims enforceable under the attachment.
Prohibition against bidding or purchase by officer.

17. No officer or other person having any duty to pe rform in connection with any sale under this Schedule
shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for, acquire or attempt to acquire any interest in the property sold.
Prohibition against sale on holidays.

18. No sale under this Schedule shall take place on a Sunday or other general holiday recognised by the State
Government or on any day which has been notified by the State Government to be a local holiday for the
area in which the sale is to take place.
Assistance by police.

19. Any officer authorised to attach or sell any propert y or to arrest the defaulter or charged with any duty
to be performed under this Schedule, may apply to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station for such
assistance as may be necessary in the discharge of hi s duties, and the authority to whom such application is
made shall depute a sufficient number of police officers for furnishing such assistance.
Entrustment of certain functions by T ax Recovery Officer.

19A.  A Tax Recovery Officer may, with the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner, entrust any of his
functions as the Tax Recovery Officer to any other officer lower than him in rank (not being lower in rank
than an Inspector of Income-tax) and such officer shall,  in relation to the functions so entrusted to him, be
deemed to be a Tax Recovery Officer.
PART II
ATTACHMENT AND SALE OF MOV ABLE PROPERTY
Attachment
Warrant.

20. Except as otherwise provided in this Schedule, when any movable property is to be attached, the officer
shall be furnished by the Tax Recovery Officer (or othe r officer empowered by him in that behalf) a warrant
in writing and signed with his name specifying the name of the defaulter and the amount to be realised.
Service of copy of warrant.

21. The officer shall cause a copy of the warrant to be served on the defaulter.
Attachment.

22. If, after service of the copy of the warrant, the amount is not paid forthwith, the officer shall proceed to
attach the movable property of the defaulter.
Property in defaulter's possession.

23. Where  the  property  to  be  attached  is  movable  property  (other  than  agricultural produce)  in  the
possession of the defaulter, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and the officer shall keep the
property in his own custody or the custody of one of his subordinates and shall be responsible for due
custody thereof:
Provided  that when the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay or when the expense of
keeping it in custody is likely to exceed its value, the officer may sell it at once.
Agricultural produce.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
878 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

24. Where the property to be attached is agricultural produce the attachment shall be made by affixing a
copy of the warrant of attachment—
(a) where such produce is growing crop,—on the land on which such crop has grown, or
(b) where such produce has been cut or gathered,—on the threshing floor or place for treading out
grain or the like, or fodder-stack, on or in which it is deposited,
and another copy on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in which the defaulter
ordinarily resides, or with the leave of the Tax R ecovery Officer, on the outer door or on some other
conspicuous part of the house in which he carries on business or personally works for gain, or in which he isknown to have  last  resided or carried on business or  personally worked for gain. The  produce  shall,
thereupon, be deemed to have passed into the possession of the Tax Recovery Officer.
Provisions as to agricultural produce under attachment.