13. Gaya Bihar

14. BhopalMadhya
Pradesh

15. Panchmahal Gujarat

16. Kamrup Assam17. Goalpara Assam

18. Nagaon Assam

19. North Goa Goa20. South Goa Goa

21. Darjeeling West Bengal

22. Nilgiri Tamil Nadu.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
382 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Special provisions in respect of certain undertakin gs in North-Eastern States .
80-IE. (1) Where the gross total income of an assesse e  includes any profits and gains derived by an
undertaking, to which this section applies, from any business referred to in sub-section (2), there shall beallowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction of an amount equal to hundred per cent
of the profits and gains derived from such business for ten consecutive assessment years commencing with
the initial assessment year.
(2) This section applies to any undertaking which has, during the period beginning on the 1st day of April,
2007 and ending before the 1st day of April, 2017, begun or begins, in any of the North-Eastern States,—
(i) to manufacture or produce any eligible article or thing;
(ii) to undertake substantial expansion to manufacture or produce any eligible article or thing;
(iii) to carry on any eligible business.
(3) This section applies to any undertaking which fulfils all the following conditions, namely :—
(i) it is not formed by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in existence :
Provided that this condition shall not apply in respect of an undertaking which is formed as a result
of the re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business of any such
undertaking as referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and within the period specified inthe said section;
(ii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose.
Explanation. —The provisions of Explanations 1 and 2 to sub-section (3) of section 80-IA shall apply for the
purposes of clause ( ii) of this sub-section as they apply for the purposes of clause ( ii) of that sub-section.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, in computing the total income of
the assessee, no deduction shall be allowed under any other section contained in Chapter VIA or in section
10A or section 10AA or section 10B or section 10BA, in relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no deduction shall be allowed to any undertaking under
this section, where the total period of deduction inclusive of the period of deduction under this section, orunder section 80-IC or under the second proviso to sub- section (4) of section 80-IB or under section 10C, as
the case may be, exceeds ten assessment years.
(6) The provisions contained in sub-section (5) and sub-sections (7) to (12) of section 80-IA shall, so far as
may be, apply to the eligible undertaking under this section.
(7) For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "initial assessment year" means the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the
undertaking  begins  to  manufacture  or  produce  articles  or  things,  or  completes  substantialexpansion;
(ii) "North-Eastern States" means the  States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura;
(iii) "substantial expansion" means increase in the investment in the plant and machinery by at least
twenty-five per cent of the book value of plant an d machinery (before taking depreciation in any
year), as on the first day of the previous year in which the substantial expansion is undertaken;
(iv) "eligible article or thing" means the article or thing other than the following :—
(a) goods fa lling under Chapter 24 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986), which pertains to tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes;
(b) pan masala as covered under Chapter 21 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff
Act, 1985 (5 of 1986);INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
383 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(c) plastic carry bags of less than 20 microns as specified by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests  vide  Notification  No.  S.O.  705(E),  dated  the  2nd  September,  1999  and  S.O.
698(E), dated the 17th June, 2003; and
(d) goods fa lling under Chapter 27 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986), produced by petroleum oil or gas refineries;
(v) "eligible business" means the business of,—
(a) hotel (not below two star category);
(b) adventure and leisure sports including ropeways;
(c) providing medical and health services in the nature of nursing home with a minimum
capacity of 25 beds;
(d) running an old-age home;
(e) operating vocational training institute  for  hotel management,  catering and  food  craft,
entrepreneurship development, nursing and para-medical, civil aviation related training,
fashion designing and industrial training;
(f) running information technology related training centre;
(g) manufacturing of information technology hardware; and
(h) bio-technology.
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from newly established industrial undertakings or ships or
hotel business in certain cases.

80J. [Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996, w.r.e.f. 1-4-1989. ]
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from business of poultry farming.

80JJ. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1997, w .e.f. 1-4-1998. ]
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from business of collecting and processing of bio-degradable
waste.

80JJA. Where the gross total income of an assessee include s any profits and gains derived from the business
of  collecting and  processing or  treating of  bio- degradable  waste  for  generating  power  or  producing
bio-fertilizers,  bio-pesticides  or  other  biological  agents  or  for  pr oducing bio-gas  or  making pellets  or
briquettes for fuel or organic manure, there shall be a llowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a
deduction of an amount equal to the whole of such profits and gains for a period of five consecutiveassessment years beginning with the assessment year rele vant to the previous year in which such business
commences.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
384 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Deduction in respect of employment of new employees.

80JJAA. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee to whom section 44AB applies, includes any
profits and gains derived from business, there shall, s ubject to the conditions specified in sub-section (2), be
allowed a deduction of an amount equal to thirty per cent of additional employee cost incurred in the course
of such business in the previous year, for three asse ssment years including the assessment year relevant to
the previous year in which such employment is provided.
(2) No deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed,—
(a) if the business is formed by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of an existing business:
Provided  that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in respect of a business which is formed
as a result of re-establishment, reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business in thecircumstances and within the period specified in section 33B;
(b) if the business is acquired by the assessee by way of  transfer from any other person or as a result of
any business reorganisation;
(c) unless the assessee furnishes the report of the accountant, as defined in the Explanation  below
sub-section (2) of section 288, before the specified date referred to in section 44ABgiving such
particulars in the report as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "additional employee cost" means the total emoluments paid or payable to additional employees
employed during the previous year:
Provided  that in the case of an existing business, the additional employee cost shall be nil, if—
(a) there is no increase in the number of em ployees from the total number of employees
employed as on the last day of the preceding year;
(b) emoluments are paid otherwise than by an account payee cheque or account payee bank
draft or by use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through such other
electronic mode as may be prescribed:
Provided further  that in the first year of a new business, emoluments paid or payable to employees 
e
(ii) "additional employee" means an employee who has been employed during the previous year and
whose employment has the effect of increasing the total number of employees employed by the
employer as on the last day of the preceding year, but does not include—
(a) an employee  whose  total emoluments are  more  than twenty-five  thousand rupees per
month; or
(b) an employee  for whom the  entire  contribution is paid by the  Government  under  the
Employees' Pension Scheme notified in accordance with the provisions of the Employees'
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952); or
(c) an employee employed for a period of less than two hundred and forty days during the
previous year; or
(d) an employee who does not participate in the recognised provident fund:
Provided that in the case of an assessee who is engaged in the business of manufacturing of apparel o
Provided further  that where an employee is employed during the previous year for a period of less t h
(iii) "emoluments" means any sum paid or payable  to an employee  in lieu of his employment  by
whatever name called, but does not include—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
385 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund or
any other fund for the benefit of the employe e under any law for the time being in force;
and
(b) any lump sum payment paid or payable to an employee at the time of termination of his
service or superannuation or voluntary retirement, such as gratuity, severance pay, leaveencashment, voluntary retrenchment benefits, commutation of pension and the like.
(3) The provisions of this section, as they stood imme diately prior to their amendment by the Finance Act,
2016, shall apply to an assessee eligible to claim an y deduction for any assessment year commencing on or
before the 1st day of April, 2016.
Deduction in respect of dividends attributable to profits and gains from new industrial undertakings
or ships or hotel business.

80K. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1986, w.e.f. 1-4-1987. Original section was inserted, in place of section
85 which was deleted, by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1967, w.e.f. 1-4-1968. ]
Deductions in respect of interest on certain securities, dividends, etc.

80L. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 2005, w .e.f. 1-4-2006. ]
Deductions in respect of certain incomes of Offshore Banking Units and International Financial
Services Centre.

80LA. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee, being a scheduled bank, or, any bank incorporated
by or under the laws of a country outside India; and having an Offshore Banking Unit in a Special Economic
Zone, includes any income referred to in sub-section (2), there shall be allowed, in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of this section, a deduction from such income, of an amount equal to—
(a) one hundred per cent of such income for five consecutive assessment years beginning with the
assessment  year  relevant  to  the  previous  year  in  which  the  permission,  under  clause  ( a) o f
sub-section (1) of section 23 of the Banking Re gulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) or permission or
registration under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) or any other
relevant law was obtained, and thereafter;
(b) fifty per cent of such income for five consecutive assessment years:
98[Provided  that for the assessment year commencing on  or after the 1st day of April, 2023, the
deduction under this clause shall be one hundred per cent of such income.]
(1A) Where the gross total income of an assessee, being a Unit of an International Financial Services Centre,
includes any income referred to in sub-section (2), there shall be allowed, in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of this section, a deduction from such income, of an amount equal to one hundred per cent ofsuch income for any ten consecutive assessment years, at the option of the assessee, out of fifteen years,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
386 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the permission, under clause ( a) of
sub-section (1) of section 23 of the Banking Regulation  Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) or permission or registration
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) or permission or registration under
the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (50 of 2019) was obtained.
(2) The income referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (1A) shall be the income—
(a) from an Offshore Banking Unit in a Special Economic Zone; or
(b) from the business referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
(10 of 1949) with an undertaking located in a Special Economic Zone or any other undertaking
which develops, develops and operates or develops, operates and maintains a Special Economic
Zone; or
(c) from any Unit of the International Financial Servic es Centre from its business for which it has been
approved for setting up in such a Centre in a Special Economic Zone;
(d) arising from the transfer of an asset, being an ai rcraft or a ship, which was leased by a unit referred
to in clause ( c) to a person, subject to the condition that the unit has commenced operation on or
before the 31st day of March, 99[2030 ].
Explanation. —For  the  purposes  of  this  clause,  "aircraft"  and  "ship"  shall have  the  meaning
assigned to it in the Explanation to clause ( 4F) of section 10.
(3) No deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the assessee furnishes along with the return of
income,—
(i) the  report,  in  the  form specified  by  the  Central Board  of  Direct  Taxes  under  clause  ( i) o f
sub-section (2) of section 80LA, as it stood immediately before its substitution by this section, ofan accountant as defined in the Explanation  below sub-section (2) of section 288, certifying that
the deduction has been correctly claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section; and
(ii) a copy of the permission obtained under clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of section 23 of the Banking
Regulation  Act,  1949  (10  of  1949)  or  copy  of  permission  or  registration  obtained  under  the
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (50 of 2019).
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "International Financial Services Centre" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( q)
of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);
(b) "scheduled bank" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( e) of section 2 of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
(c) "Special Economic Zone" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( za) of section 2
of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005);
(d) "Unit" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( zc) of section 2 of the S pecial
Economic Zones Act, 2005 (28 of 2005).

98. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.

99. Sub. for "2025" by Act No. 7 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2025 . Earlier "2025" was Sub. for "2024" by Act
No. 8 of 2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
387 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Deduction in respect of certain inter-corporate dividends .

80M. (1) Where the gross total income of a domestic comp any in any previous year includes any income by
way of dividends from any other domestic company or a foreign company or a business trust, there shall, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed in computing the total income of
such domestic company, a deduction of an amount equal to so much of the amount of income by way of
dividends received from such other domestic compan y or foreign company or business trust as does not
exceed the amount of dividend distributed by it on or before the due date.
(2) Where any deduction, in respect of the amount of dividend distributed by the domestic company, has
been allowed under sub-section (1) in any previous year , no deduction shall be allowed in respect of such
amount in any other previous year.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression  "due date" means the date one month prior to
the date for furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139.
Deduction in the case of an Indian company in re spect of royalties, etc., received from any concern in
India.

80MM. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1983, w.e.f. 1-4-1984. Original section was inserted by the Finance
Act, 1969, w .e.f. 1-4-1970. ]
Deduction in respect of dividends received from certain foreign companies.

80N. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1985, w.e.f. 1-4-1986. Th is topic was originally dealt with by section
85B which was inserted by the Finance Act, 1966, w .e.f. 1-4-1966. Omitted section 80N was inserted in
place of section 85B which was deleted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1967, w .e.f. 1-4-1968. ]
Deduction in respect of royalties, etc., from certain foreign enterprises.
80-O. Where the gross total income of an assessee, bein g an Indian company or a person (other than a
company) who is resident in India, includes any income  received by the assessee from the Government of a
foreign State or foreign enterprise in consideration for the use outside India of any patent, invention, designor registered trade mark and such income is received  in convertible foreign exchange in India, or having
been received in convertible foreign exchange outside India, or having been converted into convertible
foreign exchange outside India, is brought into India, by or on behalf of the assessee in accordance with anylaw for the time being in force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange, there shall be
allowed, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, a deduction of an amount equal
to—
(i) forty per cent for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2001;
(ii) thirty per cent for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2002;
(iii) twenty per cent for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2003;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
388 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iv) ten per cent for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2004,
of the income so received in, or brought into, India, in computing the total income of the assessee and no
deduction shall be allowed in respect of the assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2005 and any
subsequent assessment year :
Provided  that such income is received in India within a period of six months from the end of the previous
year, or within such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf:
Provided further that no deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the assessee furnishes a
certificate, in the prescribed form, along with the re turn of income, certifying that the deduction has been
correctly claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "convertible foreign exchange" means foreign exchange which is for the time being treated by the
Reserve Bank of India as convertible foreign ex change for the purposes of the law for the time
being in force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange;
(ii) "foreign enterprise" means a person who is a non-resident;
(iii) services rendered or agreed to be rendered outside India shall include services rendered from India
but shall not include services rendered in India;
(iv) "competent authority" means the Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised
under any law for the time being in force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
(2) [***]
Deduction in respect of income of co-operative societies.

80P. (1) Where, in the case of an assessee being a co-ope rative society, the gross total income includes any
income  referred to in sub-section (2), there  shall be  deducted, in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of  this section,  the  sums specified  in  sub-section  (2),  in  computing the  total income  of  theassessee.
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely :—
(a) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in—
(i) carrying on the business of banking or providing credit facilities to its members, or
(ii) a cottage industry, or
(iii) the marketing of agricultural produce grown by its members, or
(iv) the purchase of agricultural implements, seeds, livestock or other articles intended for
agriculture for the purpose of supplying them to its members, or
(v) the processing, without the aid of power, of the agricultural produce of its members, or
(vi) the collective disposal of the labour of its members, or
(vii) fishing or  allied  activities,  that  is  to  say,  the  catching,  curing,  processing,  preserving,
storing or marketing of fish or the purchase of materials and equipment in connectiontherewith for the purpose of supplying them to its members,
the whole of the amount of profits and gains of business attributable to any one or more of such
activities :
Provided  that in the case of a co-operative society falling under sub-clause ( vi), or sub-clause ( vii),
the  rules and bye-laws of the  society restrict  the  voting rights to the  following classes of itsINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
389 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
members, namely:—
(1) the individuals who contribute their labour or, as the case may be, carry on the fishing or
allied activities;
(2) the co-operative credit societies which provide financial assistance to the society;
(3) the State Government;
(b) in the case of a co-operative society, being a primary society engaged in supplying milk, oilseeds,
fruits or vegetables raised or grown by its members to—
(i) a federal co-operative society, being a society engaged in the business of supplying milk,
oilseeds, fruits, or vegetables, as the case may be; or
(ii) the Government or a local authority; or
(iii) a Government company as defined in sectio n 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956),
or a  corporation  established  by or under a  Central,  State  or  Provincial Act  (being a
company or corporation engaged in supplying milk, oilseeds, fruits or vegetables, as the
case may be, to the public),
the whole of the amount of profits and gains of such business;
(c) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in activities other than those specified in clause ( a) or
clause ( b) (either independently of, or in addition to, all or any of the activities so specified), so
much of its profits and gains attributable to such activities as does not exceed,—
(i) where  such  co-operative  society  is  a  consumers'  co-operative  society,  one  hundred
thousand rupees; and
(ii) in any other case, fifty thousand rupees.
Explanation. —In this clause, "consumers' co-operative society" means a society for the benefit of
the consumers;
(d) in respect of any income by way of interest or dividends derived by the co-operative society from
its investments with any other co-operative society, the whole of such income;
(e) in respect of any income derived by the  co-ope rative society from the  letting of godowns or
warehouses for storage, processing or fac ilitating the marketing of commodities, the whole of such
income;
(f) in the case of a co-operative society, not being a housing society or an urban consumers' society or
a  society  carrying on  transport  business  or  a  society  engaged  in  the  performance  of  any
manufacturing operations with the aid of power, where the gross total income does not exceed
twenty thousand rupees, the amount of any income by  way of interest on securities or any income
from house property chargeable under section 22.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, an "urban consumers' co-operative society" means a society
for  the  benefit  of  the  consumers  within  the  limits  of  a  municipal corporation,  municipality,  municipal
committee, notified area committee, town area or cantonment.
(3) In a case where the assessee is entitled also to the deduction under section 80HH or section 80HHA or
section 80HHB or section 80HHC or section 80HHD or section 80-I or section 80-IA or section 80J, thededuction under sub-section (1) of this section, in  relation to the sums specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or
clause ( c) of sub-section (2), shall be allowed with reference to the income, if any, as referred to in those
clauses included in the  gross total income  as reduced by the  deductions under section 80HH, section80HHA, section 80HHB, section 80HHC, section 80HHD, section 80-I, section 80-IA, section 80J and
section 80JJ.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply in re lation to any co-operative bank other than a primary
agricultural credit society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section,—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
390 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) "co-operative bank" and "primary agricultural credit society" shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);
(b) "primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank" means a society having its area of
operation confined to a taluk and the principal object of which is to provide for long-term credit for
agricultural and rural development activities.
Deduction in respect of certain income of Producer Companies.

80PA. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee, being a Producer Company having a total turnover
of less than one hundred crore rupees in any previ ous year, includes any profits and gains derived from
eligible business, there shall, in accordance with and s ubject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in
computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction of an amount equal to one hundred per cent of the
profits  and  gains  attributable  to  such  business  for  the  previous  year  relevant  to  an  assessment  year
commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 2019, but before the 1st day of April, 2025.
(2) In a case where the assessee is entitled also to deduction under any other provision of this Chapter, the
deduction under this section shall be allowed with refe rence to the income, if any, as referred to in this
section included in the gross total income as reduced by the deductions under such other provision of this
Chapter.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "eligible business" means—
(a) the marketing of agricultural produce grown by the members; or
(b) the purchase of agricultural implements, seeds, livestock or other articles intended for
agriculture for the purpose of supplying them to the members; or
(c) the processing of the agricultural produce of the members;
(ii) "member" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) of section 581A of the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(iii) "Producer Company" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( l) of section 581A of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from the business of publication of books.

80Q. (1) Where in the case of an assessee the gross total income of the previous year relevant to the
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992, or to any one of the four assessment years next
following that assessment year, includes any profits and gains derived from a business carried on in India of
printing and publication of books or publication of books, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction from such
profits and gains of an amount equal to twenty per cent thereof.
(2) In a case where the assessee is entitled also to the deduction under section 80HH or section 80HHA or
section 80HHC or section 80-I or section 80-IA or sectio n 80J or section 80P, in relation to any part of the
profits and gains referred to in sub-section (1), th e deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed with
reference to such profits and gains included in the gross total income as reduced by the deductions underINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
391 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
section 80HH, section 80HHA, section 80HHC, section 80-I, section 80-IA, section 80J and section 80P.
(3) For the purposes of this section, "books" shall not include newspapers, journals, magazines, diaries,
brochures, tracts, pamphlets and other publications of a similar nature by whatever name called.
Deduction in respect of profits and gains from the business of publication of books.

80QQ. [Omitted by the Direct Tax Laws (Amendment) Act, 1987, w .e.f. 1-4-1989. Original section was
inserted by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1970, w .e.f. 1-4-1971. ]
Deduction in respect of professional income of authors of text books in Indian languages.

80QQA. (1) Where, in the case of an individual resident in  India, being an author, the gross total income of
the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on—
(a) the  1st  day  of  April, 1980,  or  to  any one  of  the  nine  assessment  years next  following that
assessment year; or
(b) the  1st  day  of  April,  1992,  or  to  any  one  of  the  four  assessment  years next  following that
assessment year,
includes any  income  derived  by  him in  the  exercise  of  his  profession  on  account  of  any  lump  sum
consideration for the assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of any book, or of royalties
or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or  otherwise) in respect of such book, there shall, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total income of
the assessee, a deduction from such income of an amount equal to twenty-five per cent thereof.
(2) No deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed unless—
(a) the book is either in the nature of a dictionary, thesaurus or encyclopaedia or is one that has been
prescribed or recommended as a text book, or incl uded in the curriculum, by any University, for a
degree or post-graduate course of that University; and
(b) the book is written in any language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution or in any
such other language as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specifyin this behalf having regard to the need for pr omotion of publication of books of the nature referred
to in clause ( a) in that language and other relevant factors.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(i) "author" includes a joint author;
(ii) "lump sum", in regard to royalties or copyright fees, includes an advance payment on account of
such royalties or copyright fees which is not returnable;
(iii) "University" shall have the same meaning as in the Explanation  to clause ( ix) of section 47.
Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors of certain books other than text-books.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
392 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M

80QQB. (1) Where, in the case of an individual resident in India, being an author, the gross total income
includes any income, derived by him in the  exercise  of his profession, on account  of any lump sum
consideration for the assignment or grant of any of hi s interests in the copyright of any book being a work of
literary, artistic or scientific nature, or of royalty or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or
otherwise) in respect of such book, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this
section, be allowed, in computing the total income of  the assessee, a deduction from such income, computed
in the manner specified in sub-section (2).
(2) The deduction under this section shall be equal to the whole of such income referred to in sub-section
(1), or an amount of three lakh rupees, whichever is less :
Provided  that  where  the  income  by  way  of  such  royalt y  or  the  copyright  fee,  is  not  a  lump  sum
consideration in lieu of all rights of the assessee in the book, so much of the income, before allowing
expenses attributable to such income, as is in exces s of fifteen per cent of the value of such books sold
during the previous year shall be ignored :
Provided further that in respect of any income earned from any source outside India, so much of the
income shall be taken into account for the purpose of this section as is brought into India by, or on behalf of,
the assessee in convertible foreign exchange within a pe riod of six months from the end of the previous year
in which such income is earned or within such furthe r period as the competent authority may allow in this
behalf.
(3) No deduction under this section shall be  allowed unless the  assessee  furnishes a  certificate  in the
prescribed form and in the prescribed manner, duly verified by any person responsible for making suchpayment to the assessee as referred to in sub-section (1 ), along with the return of income, setting forth such
particulars as may be prescribed.
(4) No deduction under this section shall be allowed in respect of any income earned from any source
outside  India,  unless  the  assessee  furnishes  a  certifi cate,  in  the  prescribed  form from the  prescribed
authority, along with the return of income in the prescribed manner.
(5) Where a deduction for any previous year has been claimed and allowed in respect of any income
referred to in this section, no deduction in respect of such income shall be allowed under any other provision
of this Act in any assessment year.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "author" includes a joint author;
(b) "books"  shall  not  include  brochures,  commentaries,  diaries,  guides,  journals,  magazines,
newspapers, pamphlets, text-books for schools, tracts and other publications of s imilar nature, by
whatever name called;
(c) "competent authority" means the Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised
under any law for the time being in force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange;
(d) "lump sum", in regard to royalties or copyright fees, includes an advance payment on account of
such royalties or copyright fees which is not returnable.
Deduction in respect of remuneration from certain fo reign sources in the case of professors, teachers,
etc.

80R. Where the gross total income of an individual who is a citizen of India includes any remuneration
received by him outside India from any University or other educational institution established outside India
or any other association or body established outside India, for any service rendered by him during his stayoutside India in his capacity as a professor, teacher or research worker in such University, institution,INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
393 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
association or body, there shall be allowed, in comput ing the total income of the individual, a deduction fro m
such remuneration of an amount equal to—
(i) sixty per cent of such remuneration for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2001;
(ii) forty-five per cent of such remuneration for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April,
2002;
(iii) thirty per cent of such remuneration for an a ssessment year beginning on the 1st day of April,
2003;
(iv) fifteen per cent of such remuneration for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April,
2004,
as is brought into India by, or on behalf of, the asse ssee in convertible foreign exchange within a period of
six months from the end of the previous year or within  such further period as the competent authority may
allow in this behalf and no deduction shall be allowed in respect of the assessment year beginning on the 1st
day of April, 2005 and any subsequent assessment year :
Provided that no deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the assessee furnishes a certificate, in
the prescribed form, along with the return of income, certifying that the deduction has been correctlyclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression "competent authority" means the Reserve
Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in force for regulating
payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
Deduction in respect of professional income from foreign sources in certain cases.

80RR.  Where the gross total income of an individual resident in India, being an author, playwright, artist,
musician, actor or sportsman (including an athlete), includes any income derived by him in the exercise of
his profession from the Government of a foreign State or any person not resident in India, there shall be
allowed, in computing the total income of the individua l, a deduction from such income of an amount equal
to—
(i) sixty per cent of such income for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2001;
(ii) forty-five per cent of such income for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2002;
(iii) thirty per cent of such income for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2003;
(iv) fifteen per cent of such income for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2004,
as is brought into India by, or on behalf of, the asse ssee in convertible foreign exchange within a period of
six months from the end of the previous year or within  such further period as the competent authority may
allow in this behalf and no deduction shall be allowed in respect of the assessment year beginning on the 1st
day of April, 2005 and any subsequent assessment year :
Provided that no deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the assessee furnishes a certificate, in
the prescribed form, along with the return of income, certifying that the deduction has been correctly
claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression "competent authority" means the Reserve
Bank of India or such other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in force for regulating
payments and dealings in foreign exchange.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
394 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Deduction in respect of remuneration received for services rendered outside India .

80RRA.  (1)  Where  the  gross  total  income  of  an  individual  who  is  a  citizen  of  India  includes  any
remuneration received by him in foreign currency from any employer (being a foreign employer or an Indianconcern) for any service rendered by him outside India,  there shall, in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of this section, be allowed, in computing th e total income of the individual, a deduction from such
remuneration of an amount equal to—
(i) sixty per cent of such remuneration for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2001;
(ii) forty-five per cent of such remuneration for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April,
2002;
(iii) thirty per cent of such remuneration for an a ssessment year beginning on the 1st day of April,
2003;
(iv) fifteen per cent of such remuneration for an assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April,
2004,
as is brought into India by, or on behalf of, the asse ssee in convertible foreign exchange within a period of
six months from the end of the previous year or within  such further period as the competent authority may
allow in this behalf and no deduction shall be allowed in respect of the assessment year beginning on the 1st
day of April, 2005 and any subsequent assessment year :
Provided  that  no  deduction  under  this  sub-section  shall  be  allowed  unless  the  assessee  furnishes  a
certificate, in the prescribed form, along with the re turn of income, certifying that the deduction has been
correctly claimed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The deduction under this section shall be allowed—
(i) in the case of an individual who is or was, immediately before undertaking such service, in the
employment of the Central Government or any State Government, only if such service is sponsoredby the Central Government;
(ii) in the case of any other individual, only if he is  a technician and the terms and conditions of his
service outside India are approved in this behalf by the Central Government or the prescribedauthority.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "foreign  currency"  shall  have  the  meaning  assigned  to  it  in  the  Foreign  Exchange
Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);
(b) "foreign employer" means,—
(i) the Government of a foreign State; or
(ii) a foreign enterprise; or
(iii) any association or body established outside India;
(c) "technician" means a person having specialised knowledge and experience in—
(i) constructional  or  manufacturing  operations  or  mining  or  the  generation  or
distribution of electricity or any other form of power; or
(ii) agriculture, animal husbandry, dairy farming, deep sea fishing or ship building; or
(iii) public administration or industrial or business management; or
(iv) accountancy; or
(v) any  field  of  natural or  applied  science  (including medical science)  or  social
science; or
(vi) any other field which the Board may prescribe in this behalf,
who  is  employed  in  a  capacity  in  which  such  specialised  knowledge  and
experience are actually utilised;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
395 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(d) "competent authority" means the Reserve Bank of India or such other authority as is
authorised under any law for the time being in force for regulating payments and dealingsin foreign exchange.
Deduction in respect of royalty on patents.

80RRB. (1) Where in the case of an assessee, being an individual, who is—
(a) resident in India;
(b) a patentee;
(c) in receipt of any income by way of royalty in resp ect of a patent registered on or after the 1st day
of April, 2003 under the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970), and
his gross total income of the previous year includes royalty, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of this section, be allowed a deduction, from such income, of an amount equal to the whole of
such income or three lakh rupees, whichever is less:
Provided that where a compulsory licence is granted in respect of any patent under the Patents Act, 1970
(39 of 1970), the income by way of r oyalty for the purpose of allowing deduction under this section shall not
exceed the amount of royalty under the terms and conditions of a licence settled by the Controller under that
Act :
Provided further that in respect of any income earned from any source outside India, so much of the
income, shall be taken into account for the purpose of this  section as is brought into India by, or on behalf
of, the assessee in convertible foreign exchange within a period of six months from the end of the previous
year in which such income is earned or within such further period as the competent authority referred to in
clause ( c) of the Explanation to section 80QQB may allow in this behalf.
(2) No deduction under this section shall be  allowed unless the  assessee  furnishes a  certificate  in the
prescribed form, duly signed by the prescribed authorit y, along with the return of income setting forth such
particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) No deduction under this section shall be allowed in respect of any income earned from any source
outside  India, unless the  assessee  furnishes a  certificate  in the  prescribed form, from the  authority orauthorities, as may be prescribed, along with the return of income.
(4) Where a deduction for any previous year has been claimed and allowed in respect of any income
referred to in this section, no deduction in resp ect  of such income  shall be  allowed, under any other
provision of this Act in any assessment year.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "Controller" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970);
(b) "lump sum" includes an advance payment on account of such royalties which is not returnable;
(c) "patent" means a patent (including a patent of addition) granted under the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of
1970);
(d) "patentee" means the person, being the true and first inventor of the invention, whose name is
entered on the patent register as the patentee, in accordance with the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of
1970), and includes every such person, being the true and first inventor of the invention, wheremore than one person is registered as patentee under that Act in respect of that patent;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
396 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(e) "patent of addition" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( q) of sub-section (1) of section
2 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970);
(f) "patented article" and "patented process" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in
clause ( o) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970);
(g) "royalty", in respect of a patent, means consideration (including any lump sum consideration but
excluding any consideration which would be the income of the recipient chargeable under the head
"Capital gains" or consideration for sale of product manufactured with the use of patented process
or of the patented article for commercial use) for—
(i) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in respect of a patent;
or
(ii) the imparting of any information concerning the working of, or the use of, a patent; or
(iii) the use of any patent; or
(iv) the rendering of any services in connection with the activities referred to in sub-clauses ( i)
to (iii);
(h) "true and first inventor" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( y) of sub-section (1) of
section 2 of the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970).
Deduction in respect of compensation for termination of managing agency, etc., in the case of assessees
other than companies.

80S. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1986, w .e.f. 1-4-1987. Original section was introduced in place of old
section 112 by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1967, w .e.f. 1-4-1968. ]
Deduction in respect of long-term capital gains in the case of assessees other than companies.
80T . [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. Original section was inserted by the Finance (No.
2) Act, 1967, w.e.f. 1-4-1968 in replacement of section 114. ]
Deduction in respect of winnings from lottery.
80TT .  [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1986, w .e.f. 1-4-1987. Original section was inserted by the Finance
Act, 1972, w .e.f. 1-4-1972 and amended by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1980, w.e.f. 1-4-1981. ]
CA.—Deductions in respect of other incomesINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
397 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in savin gs account .
80TT A. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee (other than the assessee referred to in section
80TTB), being an individual or a  Hindu undivided fa mily,  includes any  income  by  way  of  interest  on
deposits (not being time deposits) in a savings account with—
(a) a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies (including
any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);
(b) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking (including a co-operative
land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank); or
(c) a Post Office as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (6 of 1898),
there shall, in accordance with and subject to the provi sions of this section, be allowed, in computing the
total income of the assessee a deduction as specified hereunder, namely:—
(i) in a case where the amount of such income does not exceed in the aggregate ten thousand
rupees, the whole of such amount; and
(ii) in any other case, ten thousand rupees.
(2) Where the income referred to in this section is derived from any deposit in a savings account held by, or
on behalf of, a firm, an association of persons or a body of individuals, no deduction shall be allowed under
this section in respect  of such income in computing the total income of any partner of the firm or any
member of the association or any individual of the body.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, "time deposits" means the deposits repayable on expiry of
fixed periods.
Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in case of senior citizens.

80TTB. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee, being a senior citizen, includes any income by way
of interest on deposits with—
(a) a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), applies (including
any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of that Act);
(b) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking (including a co-operative
land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank); or
(c) a Post Office as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (6 of 1898),
there shall, in accordance with and subject to the provi sions of this section, be allowed, in computing the
total income of the assessee, a deduction—
(i) in a case where the amount of such income does not exceed in the aggregate fifty thousand
rupees, the whole of such amount; and
(ii) in any other case, fifty thousand rupees.
(2) Where the income referred to in sub-section (1) is derived from any deposit held by, or on behalf of, a
firm, an association of persons or a body of individuals, no deduction shall be allowed under this section inrespect of such income in computing the total income of any partner of the firm or any member of the
association or any individual of the body.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "senior citizen" means an individual resident in India who is
of the age of sixty years or more at any time during the relevant previous year.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
398 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
D.—Other deductions
Deduction in case of a person with disability.

80U. (1) In computing the total income of an individua l, being a resident, who, at any time during the
previous year, is certified by the medical authority to be a person with disability, there shall be allowed a
deduction of a sum of seventy-five thousand rupees:
Provided that where such individual is a person with severe disability, the provisions of this sub-section
shall  have  effect  as  if  for  the  words  "seventy-five  thousand  rupees",  the  words  "one  hundred  and
twenty-five thousand rupees" had been substituted.
(2) Every individual claiming a deduction under this section shall furnish a copy of the certificate issued by
the medical authority in the form and manner, as may be prescribed, along with the return of income undersection 139, in respect of the assessment year for which the deduction is claimed :
Provided  that where the condition of disab ility requires reassessment of its extent after a period stipulated in
the aforesaid certificate, no deduction under this section shall be allowed for any assessment year relating to
any previous year beginning after the expiry of the previous year during which the aforesaid certificate of
disability  had  expired,  unless a  new certificate  is obtained  from the  medical authority in  the  form and
manner, as may be prescribed, and a copy thereof is fu rnished along with the return of income under section

139.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "disability" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( i) of section 2 of the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal O pportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of
1996), and includes "autism", "cerebral palsy" and "multiple disab ilities" referred to in clauses ( a),
(c) and ( h) of section 2 of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999);
(b) "medical authority" means the medical authority as referred to in clause ( p) of section 2 of the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal O pportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1995 (1 of 1996), or such other medical authority as may, by notification, be specified by theCentral Government for certifying "autism", "cerebral palsy", "multiple disabilities", "person with
disability" and "severe disability" referred to in clauses ( a), (c), (h), (j) and ( o) of section 2 of the
National Trust  for  Welfare  of  Persons  with  Autism,  Cerebral Palsy,  Mental Retardation  andMultiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999);
(c) "person with disability" means a person referred to in clause ( t) of section 2 of the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal O pportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of
1996), or clause ( j) of section 2 of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999);
(d) "person with severe disability" means—
(i) a  person  with  eighty  per  cent  or  more  of  one  or  more  disabilities,  as  referred  to  in
sub-section  (4)  of  section  56  of  the  Persons  with  Disabilities  (Equal  O pportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996); or
(ii) a person with severe disability referred to in clause ( o) of section 2 of the National Trust
for  Welfare  of  Persons with  Autism,  Cerebral Palsy,  Mental Retardation  and  Multiple
Disabilities Act, 1999 (44 of 1999).INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
399 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Deduction from gross total income of the parent in certain cases .
80V . [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1994, w.e.f. 1-4-1995. ]
Deduction in respect of expenses incurred in connection with certain proceedings under the Act.
80VV . [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1985, w .e.f. 1-4-1986. Original section was inserted by the Taxation
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975, w .e.f. 1-4-1976. ]
CHAPTER VI-B
RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN DEDUCTIONS IN THE CASE OF COMPANIES
[Chapter VI-B, consisting of section 80VVA, omitted by the Finance Act, 1987, w.e.f. 1-4-1988. Original
Chapter was inserted by the Finance Act, 1983, w .e.f. 1-4-1984 and amended by the Finance Act, 1985,w .e.f. 1-4-1986 and Finance Act, 1986, w.e.f. 1-4-1987. ]
CHAPTER VII
INCOMES FORMING PART OF TOTAL INCOME ON WHICH NO INCOME-TAX IS PAYABLE

81. to 85C. [Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1967, w .e.f. 1-4-1968. Provisions of sections 81, 82, 83,
84, 85, 85A, 85B and 85C were incorporated from the same date in sections 80P, 80Q, 10( 29), 80J (now
omitted), 80K (now omitted), 80M (now omitted), 80N (now omitted) and 80-O, respectively. ]
Share of member of an association of persons or body of individuals in the income of the association or
body.

86. Where the assessee is a member of an association of persons or body of individuals (other than a
company or a co-operative society or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of
1860), or under any law corresponding to that Act in forc e in any part of India), income-tax shall not be
payable by the assessee in respect of his share in the income of the association or body computed in the
manner provided in section 67A :
Provided  that,—
(a) where the association or body is chargeable to ta x on its total income at the maximum marginal rate
or any higher rate under any of the provisions of  this Act, the share of a member computed as
aforesaid shall not be included in his total income;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
400 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(b) in any other case, the share of a member computed as aforesaid shall form part of his total income :
Provided further  that where no income-tax is chargeable on the total income of the association or body, the
share of a member computed as aforesaid shall be chargeable to tax as part of his total income and nothing
contained in this section shall apply to the case.
Deduction from tax on certain securities.

86A. [Omitted by the Finance Act, 1988, w .e.f. 1-4-1989. Original section was inserted by the Finance Act,
1965, w .e.f. 1-4-1965. ]
CHAPTER VIII
REBATES AND RELIEFS
A.—Rebate of income-tax
Rebate to be allowed in computing income-tax.

87. (1) In computing the  amount  of income-tax on the  total income  of an assessee  with which he  is
chargeable for any assessment year, there shall be allowed from the amount of income-tax (as computed
before allowing the deductions under this Chapter), in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
1[sections 87A and 88E], the deductions specified in those sections.
(2) The aggregate amount of the deductions under 1a[section 87A or section 88E] shall not, in any case,
exceed the amount of income-tax (as computed before  allowing the deductions under this Chapter) on the
total income of the assessee with which he is chargeable for any assessment year.

1. Sub. for "sections 87A, 88, 88A, 88B, 88C, 88D and 88E" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
1a. Sub. for "section 87A or section 88 or section 88A or section 88B or section 88C or section 88D or
section 88E" by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2023.
Rebate of income-tax in case of certain individuals.

87A. An assessee, being an individual resident in India, whose total income does not exceed five hundred
thousand rupees, shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of income-tax (as computed before
allowing the  deductions under this Chapter) on his to tal income  with which he  is chargeable  for any
assessment year, of an amount equal to hundred per cent of such income-tax or an amount of twelve
thousand and five hundred rupees, whichever is less:INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
401 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
2[Provided that where the total income of the assessee is chargeable to tax under sub-section (1A) of
section 115BAC, and the total income—
(a)does not exceed 3[seven ] hundred thousand rupees, the assessee shall be entitled to a deduction
from the  amount  of  income-tax  (as computed  before  allowing for  the  deductions under  this
Chapter) on his total income with which he is chargeable for any assessment year, of an amount
equal to one hundred per cent of such income-tax or an amount of 4[twenty-five ] thousand rupees,
whichever is less;
(b)exceeds 3[seven ] hundred thousand rupees and the  income-tax payable  on such total income
exceeds the amount by which the total income is in excess of 3[seven ] hundred thousand rupees,
the assessee shall be entitled to a deduction from the amount of income-tax (as computed before
allowing the deductions under this Chapter) on his total income, of an amount equal to the amount
by which the income-tax payable on such total income is in excess of the amount by which thetotal income exceeds seven hundred thousand rupees.]
Following second proviso shall be inserted after the proviso to section 87A by the Finance Act, 2025,
w.e.f. 1-4-2026:
Provided further  that the deduction under the first proviso, shall not exceed the amount of income-tax
payable as per the rates provided in sub-section (1A) of section 115BAC.

2. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.

3. Word "twelve" shall be sub. for "seven" by Act No. 07 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.

4.Word "sixty" shall be sub. for "twenty-five" by Act No. 07 of 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026.
Rebate on life insurance premia, contribution to provident fund, etc.
88 . [ Omitted by the Finance Act, 2023, w .e.f. 1-4-2023 .]
Rebate in respect of investment in certain new shares or units.

88A. [ Omitted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996, w .r.e.f. 1-4-1994. ]
Rebate of income-tax in case of individuals of sixty-five years or above.

88B. [ Omitted by the Finance Act, 2005, w .e.f.1-4-2006. ]INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
402 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Rebate of income-tax in case of women below sixty-five years.

88C. [ Omitted by the Finance Act, 2005, w.e.f.1-4-2006. ]
Rebate of income-tax in case of certain individuals.

88D. [ Omitted by the Finance Act, 2005, w.e.f.1-4-2006. ]
Rebate in respect of securities transaction tax.

88E. (1) Where the total income of an assessee in a previous year includes any income, chargeable under
the head "Profits and gains of business or profession", arising from taxable securities transactions, he shall
be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of income-tax on such income arising from such transactions,
computed in the manner provided in sub-section (2), of an amount equal to the securities transaction taxpaid by him in respect of the taxable securities transa ctions entered into in the course of his business during
that previous year:
Provided  that no deduction under this sub-section shall be allowed unless the assessee furnishes along with
the return of income, evidence of payment of securities transaction tax in the prescribed form:
Provided further  that the amount of deduction under this sub-section shall not exceed the amount of
income-tax on such income computed in the manner provided in sub-section (2).
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the amount of income-tax on the income arising from the taxable
securities transactions, referred to in that sub-section, shall be equal to the amount calculated by applying
the average rate of income-tax on such income.
(3) No deduction under this section shall be allowed in, or after, the assessment year beginning on the 1st
day of April, 2009.
Explanation.— For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  the  expressions,  "taxable  securities  transaction"  and
"securities transaction tax" shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them under Chapter VII of
the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004.
B.—Relief for income-tax
Relief when salary, etc., is paid in arrears or in advance.

89. Where an assessee is in receipt of a sum in the nature of salary, being paid in arrears or in advance or is
in receipt, in any one financial year, of salary for more than twelve months or a payment which under the
provisions of clause ( 3) of section 17 is a profit in lieu of salary, or is in receipt of a sum in the nature of
family pension as defined in the Explanation to clause ( iia) of section 57, being paid in arrears, due to which
his total income is assessed at a rate higher than that  at which it would otherwise have been assessed, theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
403 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Assessing Officer shall, on an application made to him in this behalf, grant such relief as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such relief shall be granted in respect of  any amount received or receivable by an assessee
on his voluntary retirement or termination of his service, in accordance with any scheme or schemes of
voluntary retirement or in the case of a public sector company referred to in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( 10C)
of section 10, a scheme of voluntary separation, if an exemption in respect of any amount received orreceivable on such voluntary retirement or termination of his service or voluntary separation has been
claimed by the assessee under clause ( 10C) of section 10 in respect of such, or any other, assessment year.
Relief from taxation in income from retirement benefit account maintained in a notified country.

89A. Where a specified person has income accrued in a specified account, such income shall be taxed in
such manner and in such year as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "notified country" means a country as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette for the purposes of this section;
(b) "specified account" means an account maintained in a notified country by the specified person in
respect of his retirement benefits and the income from such account is not taxable on accrual basis
but is taxed by such country at the time of withdrawal or redemption;
(c) "specified person" means a person resident in India who opened a specified account in a notified
country while being non-resident in India and resident in that country.
CHAPTER IX
DOUBLE T AXATION RELIEF
Agreement with foreign countries or specified territories.90. (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of any country outside
India or specified territory outside India,—
(a) for the granting of relief in respect of—
(i) income on which have been paid both income-tax under this Act and income-tax in that
country or specified territory, as the case may be, or
(ii) income-tax chargeable under this Act and under the corresponding law in force in that
country or specified territory, as the case may be, to promote mutual economic relations,
trade and investment, or
(b) for the avoidance of double taxation of income under this Act and under the corresponding law in
force in that country or specified territory, as the case may be, without creating opportunities for
non-taxation or reduced taxation through tax evasion or avoidance  (including through treaty-
shopping arrangements aimed at obtaining reliefs provided in the said agreement for the indirect
benefit to residents of any other country or territory), or
(c) for exchange of information for the prevention of evasion or avoidance of income-tax chargeable
under this Act or under the corresponding law in force in that country or specified territory, as theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
404 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
case may be, or investigation of cases of such evasion or avoidance, or
(d) for recovery of income-tax under this Act and under the corresponding law in force in that country
or specified territory, as the case may be,
and may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as may be necessary for implementing
the agreement.
(2) Where the Central Government has entered into an agreement with the Government of any country
outside India or specified territory outside India, as the case may be, under sub-section (1) for granting relief
of tax, or as the case may be, avoidance of double taxation, then, in relation to the assessee to whom suchagreement applies, the provisions of this Act shall a pply to the extent they are more beneficial to that
assessee.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sectio n (2), the provisions of Chapter X-A of the Act shall
apply to the assessee even if such provisions are not beneficial to him.
(3) Any term used but not defined in this Act or in th e agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall, unless
the context otherwise requires, and is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the agreement, have
the same meaning as assigned to it in the  notification issued by the Central Government  in the Official
Gazette in this behalf.
(4) An assessee, not being a resident, to whom an agreement referred to in sub-section (1) applies, shall not
be entitled to claim any relief under such agreement unless a certificate of his being a resident in any country
outside  India  or  specified  territory  outside  India,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  obtained  by  him from the
Government of that country or specified territory.
(5) The assessee referred to in sub-section (4) shall also provide such other documents and information, as
may be prescribed.
Explanation 1. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the charge of tax in respect of a
foreign company at a rate higher than the rate at which a domestic company is chargeable, shall not be
regarded as less favourable charge or levy of tax in respect of such foreign company.
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of this section, "specified territory" means any area outside India which
may be notified as such by the Central Government.
Explanation 3. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any term is used in any
agreement entered into under sub-section (1) and not defined under the said agreement or the Act, but is
assigned  a  meaning to  it  in  the  notification  issu ed  under  sub-section  (3)  and  the  notification  issued
thereunder being in force, then, the meaning assigned to such term shall be deemed to have effect from the
date on which the said agreement came into force.
Explanation 4.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any term used in an agreement
entered into under sub-section (1) is defined under the said agreement, the said term shall have the samemeaning as assigned to it in the agreement; and where the term is not defined in the said agreement, but
defined in the Act, it shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Act and explanation, if any, given
to it by the Central Government.
Adoption by Central Government of agreement between specified associations for double taxation
relief.

90A. (1) Any specified association in India may enter into an agreement with any specified association in the
specified territory outside India and the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,make such provisions as may be necessary for adopting and implementing such agreement—INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
405 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(a) for the granting of relief in respect of—
(i) income on which have been paid both income-tax under this Act and income-tax in any
specified territory outside India; or
(ii) income-tax chargeable under this Act and under the corresponding law in force in that
specified  territory  outside  India  to  promote  mutual  economic  relations,  trade  andinvestment, or
(b) for the avoidance of double taxation of income under this Act and under the corresponding law in
force in that specified territory outside India, without creating opportunities for non-taxation orreduced  taxation  through  tax  evasion  or  avoidance  (including  through  treaty-shopping
arrangements aimed at obtaining reliefs provided in the said agreement for the indirect benefit to
residents of any other country or territory), or
(c) for exchange of information for the prevention of evasion or avoidance of income-tax chargeable
under this Act or under the corresponding law in forc e in that specified territory outside India, or
investigation of cases of such evasion or avoidance, or
(d) for recovery of  income-tax under this Act  and under the  corresponding law in force  in that
specified territory outside India.
(2) Where a specified association in India has entered in to an agreement with a sp ecified association of any
specified territory outside India under sub-section (1) and such agreement has been notified under that
sub-section, for granting relief of tax, or as the case may be, avoidance of double taxation, then, in relationto the assessee to whom such agreement applies, the provi sions of this Act shall apply to the extent they are
more beneficial to that assessee.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sectio n (2), the provisions of Chapter X-A of the Act shall
apply to the assessee even if such provisions are not beneficial to him.
(3) Any term used but not defined in this Act or in th e agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall, unless
the context otherwise requires, and is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the agreement, have
the same meaning as assigned to it in the  notification issued by the Central Government  in the Official
Gazette in this behalf.
(4) An assessee, not being a resident, to whom the agre ement referred to in sub-section (1) applies, shall not
be entitled to claim any relief under such agreement unless a certificate of his being a resident in any
specified territory outside India, is obtained by him from the Government of that specified territory.
(5) The assessee referred to in sub-section (4) shall also provide such other documents and information, as
may be prescribed.
Explanation 1. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the charge of tax in respect of a
company incorporated in the specified territory outside India at a rate higher than the rate at which a
domestic company is chargeable, shall not be regarded as  less favourable charge or levy of tax in respect of
such company.
Explanation 2. —For the purposes of this section, the expressions—
(a) "specified association" means any institution, association or body, whether incorporated or not,
functioning under any law for the time being in force in India or the laws of the specified territory
outside India and which may be notified as such by the Central Government for the purposes of
this section;
(b) "specified territory" means any area outside Indi a which may be notified as such by the Central
Government for the purposes of this section.
Explanation 3.— For the  removal of doubts, it  is hereby declared that where  any term is used in any
agreement entered into under sub-section (1) and not defined under the said agreement or the Act, but is
assigned  a  meaning to  it  in  the  notification  issu ed  under  sub-section  (3)  and  the  notification  issued
thereunder being in force, then, the meaning assigned to such term shall be deemed to have effect from theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
406 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
date on which the said agreement came into force.
Explanation 4.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any term used in an agreement
entered into under sub-section (1) is defined under the said agreement, the said term shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it in the agreement; and where the term is not defined in the said agreement, but
defined in the Act, it shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Act and explanation, if any, givento it by the Central Government.
Countries with which no agreement exists.

91. (1) If any person who is resident in India in any previous year proves that, in respect of his income which
accrued or arose during that previous year outside I ndia (and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in
India), he has paid in any country with which ther e is no agreement under section 90 for the relief or
avoidance of double taxation, income-tax, by deduction or otherwise, under the law in force in that country,he shall be entitled to the deduction from the Indian income-tax payable by him of a sum calculated on such
doubly taxed income at the Indian rate of tax or the rate of tax of the said country, whichever is the lower,
or at the Indian rate of tax if both the rates are equal.
(2) If any person who is resident in India in any prev ious year proves that in respect of his income which
accrued or arose to him during that previous year in Pakistan he has paid in that country, by deduction or
otherwise, tax payable to the Government under any law for the time being in force in that country relating
to taxation of agricultural income, he shall be entitled to a deduction from the Indian income-tax payable byhim—
(a) of the amount of the tax paid in Pakistan under any law aforesaid on such income which is liable to
tax under this Act also; or
(b) of a sum calculated on that income at the Indian rate of tax;
whichever is less.
(3) If any non-resident person is assessed on his share in the income of a registered firm assessed as resident
in India in any previous year and such share include s any income accruing or arising outside India during
that previous year (and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India) in a country with which there is no
agreement under section 90 for the relief or avoidanc e of double taxation and he proves that he has paid
income-tax by deduction or otherwise under the law in force in that country in respect of the income so
included he shall be entitled to a deduction from the Indian income-tax payable by him of a sum calculatedon such doubly taxed income so included at the Indian ra te of tax or the rate of tax of the said country,
whichever is the lower, or at the Indian rate of tax if both the rates are equal.
Explanation. —In this section,—
(i) the expression "Indian income-tax" means income-tax charged in accordance with the provisions of
this Act;
(ii) the expression "Indian rate of tax" means the rate determined by dividing the amount of Indian
income-tax after deduction of any relief due under the provisions of this Act but before deduction
of any relief due under this Chapter, by the total income;
(iii) the expression "rate of tax of the said country" means income-tax and super-tax actually paid in the
said country in accordance with the corresponding laws in force in the said country after deduction
of all relief due, but before deduction of any re lief due in the said country in respect of double
taxation, divided by the whole amount of the income as assessed in the said country;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
407 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(iv) the expression "income-tax" in relation to any country includes any excess profits tax or business
profits tax charged on the profits by the Government of any part of that country or a local authority
in that country.
CHAPTER X
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO A VOIDANCE OF TAX
Computation of income from international transaction having regard to arm's length price.92. (1) Any income arising from an international transaction shall be computed having regard to the arm's
length price.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarifie d that the allowance for any expense or interest
arising from an international transaction shall also be determined having regard to the arm's length price.
(2)  Where  in  an  international transaction  or  specified  domestic  transaction,  two  or  more  associated
enterprises enter into a mutual agreement or arrangement for the allocation or apportionment of, or any
contribution to, any cost or expense incurred or to be  incurred in connection with a benefit, service or
facility provided or to be provided to any one or more of such enterprises, the cost or expense allocated or
apportioned to, or, as the case may be, contributed by, an y such enterprise shall be determined having regard
to the arm's length price of such benefit, service or facility, as the case may be.
(2A) Any allowance for an expenditure or interest or allocation of any cost or expense or any income in
relation to the specified domestic transaction shall be computed having regard to the arm's length price.
(3)  The  provisions of  this section  shall not  apply  in  a  case  where  the  computation  of  income  under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2A) or the determination of the allowance for any expense or interest under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2A), or the determinatio n of any cost or expense allocated or apportioned, or,
as the case may be, contributed under sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A), has the effect of reducing the
income chargeable to tax or increasing the loss, as the case may be, computed on the basis of entries made in
the books of account in respect of the previous year in which the international transaction or specifieddomestic transaction was entered into.
Meaning of associated enterprise.

92A. (1) For the  purposes of this section and sect ions 92, 92B, 92C, 92D, 92E  and 92F, "associated
enterprise", in relation to another enterprise, means an enterprise—
(a) which participates, directly or indirectly, or th rough one or more intermediaries, in the management
or control or capital of the other enterprise; or
(b) in respect of which one or more persons who participate, directly or indirectly, or through one or
more intermediaries, in its management or control or capital, are the same persons who participate,directly or indirectly, or through one or more intermediaries, in the management or control or
capital of the other enterprise.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), two enterprises shall be deemed to be associated enterprises if, at
any time during the previous year,—
(a) one enterprise holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying not less than twenty-six per cent of theINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
408 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
voting power in the other enterprise; or
(b) any person or enterprise holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying not less than twenty-six per
cent of the voting power in each of such enterprises; or
(c) a loan advanced by one enterprise to the other enterprise constitutes not less than fifty-one per cent
of the book value of the total assets of the other enterprise; or
(d) one enterprise guarantees not less than ten per cent of the total borrowings of the other enterprise;
or
(e) more than half of the board of directors or members of the governing board, or one or more
executive directors or executive members of the governing board of one enterprise, are appointed
by the other enterprise; or
(f) more than half of the directors or members of th e governing board, or one or more of the executive
directors or members of the governing board, of ea ch of the two enterprises are appointed by the
same person or persons; or
(g) the manufacture or processing of goods or articles or business carried out by one enterprise is
wholly dependent on the use of know-how, patents, copyrights, trade-marks, licences, franchises or
any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, or any data, documentation, drawing or
specification relating to any patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process, of whichthe other enterprise is the owner or in respect of which the other enterprise has exclusive rights; or
(h) ninety per cent or more of the raw material s and consumables required for the manufacture or
processing of goods or articles carried out by one  enterprise, are supplied by the other enterprise, or
by persons specified by the other enterprise, and the prices and other conditions relating to the
supply are influenced by such other enterprise; or
(i) the goods or articles manufactured or processed by  one enterprise, are sold to the other enterprise
or to persons specified by the other enterprise, and the prices and other conditions relating thereto
are influenced by such other enterprise; or
(j) where one enterprise is controlled by an individual, the other enterprise is also controlled by such
individual or his relative or jointly by such individual and relative of such individual; or
(k) where one enterprise is controlled by a Hindu undivided fa mily, the other enterprise is controlled
by a member of such Hindu undivided fa mily or by a relative of a member of such Hi ndu undivided
family or jointly by such member and his relative; or
(l) where one enterprise is a firm, association of persons or body of individuals, the other enterprise
holds not less than ten per cent interest in such firm, association of persons or body of individuals;or
(m) there exists between the two enterprises, any relationship of mutual interest, as may be prescribed.
Meaning of international transaction.

92B. (1) For the purposes of this section and sections  92, 92C, 92D and 92E, "international transaction"
means a transaction between two or more associated enterprises, either or both of whom are non-residents,
in the nature of purchase, sale or lease of tangible or  intangible property, or provision of services, or lending
or borrowing money, or any other transaction having a bearing on the profits, income, losses or assets of
such enterprises, and shall include a mutual agreem ent or arrangement between two or more associated
enterprises for the allocation or apportionment of, or any contribution to, any cost or expense incurred or to
be incurred in connection with a benefit, service or facility provided or to be provided to any one or more ofsuch enterprises.INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
409 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(2) A transaction entered into by an enterprise with a person other than an associated enterprise shall, for the
purposes  of  sub-section  (1),  be  deemed  to  be  an  international transaction  entered  into  between  two
associated enterprises, if there exists a prior agreement in relation to the relevant transaction between such
other person and the  associated enterprise, or the  terms of the  relevant  transaction are  determined insubstance between such other person and the associated  enterprise where the enterprise or the associated
enterprise or both of them are non-residents irrespecti ve of whether such other person is a non-resident or
not.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that—
(i) the expression "international transaction" shall include—
(a) the  purchase,  sale,  transfer,  lease  or  use  of  tangible  property  including  building,
transportation vehicle, machinery, equipment, tools, plant, furniture, commodity or any
other article, product or thing;
(b) the purchase, sale, transfer, lease or use of intangible property, including the transfer of
ownership  or  the  provision  of  use  of  rights  regarding land  use,  copyrights,  patents,
trademarks,  licences,  franchises,  customer  list,  marketing channel,  brand,  commercial
secret, know-how, industrial property right, exterior design or practical and new design orany other business or commercial rights of similar nature;
(c) capital financing, including any type of long-term or short-term borrowing, lending or
guarantee, purchase or sale of marketable securities or any type of advance, payments ordeferred payment or receivable or any other debt arising during the course of business;
(d) provision  of  services,  including  provision  of  market  research,  market  development,
marketing management, administration, technical service, repairs, design, consultation,agency, scientific research, legal or accounting service;
(e) a transaction of business restructuring or reorganisation, entered into by an enterprise with
an associated enterprise, irrespective of the fa ct that it has bearing on the profit, income,
losses or assets of such enterprises at the time of the transaction or at any future date;
(ii) the expression "intangible property" shall include—
(a) marketing related intangible assets, such as, trademarks, trade names, brand names, logos;
(b) technology related intangible assets, such as, process patents, patent applications, technical
documentation such as laboratory notebooks, technical know-how;
(c) artistic  related  intangible  assets,  such  as,  literary  works  and  copyrights,  musical
compositions, copyrights, maps, engravings;
(d) data processing related intangible assets, such as, proprietary computer software, software
copyrights, automated databases, and integrated circuit masks and masters;
(e) engineering related intangible  assets, such as, industrial design, product  patents, trade
secrets, engineering drawing and schematics, blueprints, proprietary documentation;
(f) customer related intangible assets, such as, customer lists, customer contracts, customer
relationship, open purchase orders;
(g) contract  related  intangible  assets,  such  as,  favourable  supplier,  contracts,  licence
agreements, franchise agreements, non-compete agreements;
(h) human  capital  related  intangible  assets,  such  as,  trained  and  organised  work  force,
employment agreements, union contracts;
(i) location related intangible assets, such as, leasehold interest, mineral exploitation rights,
easements, air rights, water rights;
(j) goodwill related intangible  assets, such as, institutional goodw ill,  professional practice
goodw ill,  personal g oodwill of professional, celebrity goodw ill,  general  business  goingINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
410 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
concern value;
(k) methods,  programmes,  systems,  procedures,  campaigns,  surveys,  studies,  forecasts,
estimates, customer lists, or technical data;
(l) any other similar item that derives its value from its intellectual content rather than its
physical attributes.
Meaning of specified domestic transaction.

92BA. For the purposes of this section and sections 92, 92C, 92D and 92E, "specified domestic transaction"
in case of an assessee means any of the following transactions, not being an international transaction,
namely:—
(i) [***]
(ii) any transaction referred to in section 80A;
(iii) any transfer of goods or services referred to in sub-section (8) of section 80-IA;
(iv) any business transacted between the assessee and othe r person as referred to in sub-section (10) of
section 80-IA;
(v) any transaction, referred to in any other section under Chapter VI-A or section 10AA, to which
provisions of sub-section (8) or sub-section (10) of section 80-IA are applicable; or
(va) any business transacted between the persons referred to in sub-section (6) of section 115BAB;
5[(vb)any business transacted between the assessee and other person as referred to in sub-section (4) of
section 115BAE;]
(vi) any other transaction as may be prescribed,
and where the aggregate of such transactions en tered into by the assessee in the previous year
exceeds a sum of twenty crore rupees.

5. Ins. by Act No. 08 of 2023, w.e.f. 1-4-2024.
Computation of arm's length price.

92C. (1) The arm's length price in relation to an international transaction or specified domestic transaction
shall be determined by any of the following methods, being the most appropriate method, having regard to
the nature of transaction or class of transaction or class of associated persons or functions performed by
such persons or such other relevant factors as the Board may prescribe, namely :—
(a) comparable uncontrolled price method;
(b) resale price method;
(c) cost plus method;INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
411 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
(d) profit split method;
(e) transactional net margin method;
(f) such other method as may be prescribed by the Board.
(2) The most appropriate method referred to in sub-section (1) shall be applied, for determination of arm's
length price, in the manner as may be prescribed :
Provided that where more than one price is determined by the most appropriate method, the arm's length
price shall be taken to be the arithmetical mean of such prices:
Provided further that if the variation between the arm's length price so determined and price at which the
international transaction or specified domestic transaction has actually been undertaken does not exceedsuch percentage not exceeding three per cent of the latter, as may be notified by the Central Government in
the Official Gazette in this behalf, the price at wh ich the international transaction or specified domestic
transaction has actually been undertaken shall be deemed to be the arm's length price :
Provided also  that where more than one price is determined by the most appropriate method, the arm's
length price in relation to an international transaction or specified domestic transaction undertaken on or
after the 1st day of April, 2014, shall be computed in such manner as may be prescribed and accordingly the
first and second proviso shall not apply.
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the provisions of the second proviso
shall also be applicable to all assessment or reassessment proceedings pending before an Assessing Officer as
on the 1st day of October, 2009.
(2A) Where the first proviso to sub-section (2) as it stood before its amendment by the Finance (No. 2) Act,
2009 (33 of 2009), is applicable in respect of an international transaction for an assessment year and thevariation between the  arithmetical mean referred to in the  said proviso and the  price  at  which such
transaction has actually been undertaken exceeds five per cent of the arithmetical mean, then, the assessee
shall not be entitled to exercise the option as referred to in the said proviso.
(2B) Nothing contained in sub-section (2A) shall empower the Assessing Officer either to assess or reassess
under section 147 or pass an order enhancing the assessm ent or reducing a refund already made or otherwise
increasing the liability of the assessee under section 154 for any assessment year the proceedings of which
have been completed before the 1st day of October, 2009.
(3) Where during the course of any proceeding for the assessment of income, the Assessing Officer is, on the
basis of material or information or document in his possession, of the opinion that—
(a) the price charged or paid in an international transaction or specified domestic transaction has not
been determined in accordance with sub-sections (1) and (2); or
(b) any  information  and  document  relating to  an  international transaction  or  specified  domestic
transaction have not been kept and maintained by the assessee in accordance with the provisionscontained in sub-section (1) of section 92D and the rules made in this behalf; or
(c) the information or data used in computation of the arm's length price is not reliable or correct; or
(d) the assessee has failed to furnish, within the specified time, any information or document which he
was required to furnish by a notice issued under sub-section (3) of section 92D,
the Assessing Officer may proceed to determine the arm's length price in relation to the said international
transaction or specified domestic transaction in accordance with sub-sections (1) and (2), on the basis of
such material or information or document available with him:
Provided  that an opportunity shall be given by th e Assessing Officer by serving a notice ca lling upon the
assessee to show cause, on a date and time to be specified in the notice, why the arm's length price shouldnot be so determined on the basis of material or in formation or document in the possession of the Assessing
Officer.
(4) Where an arm's length price is determined by the Assessing Officer under sub-section (3), the AssessingINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
412 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
Officer may compute the total income of the assessee having regard to the arm's length price so determined :
Provided  that no deduction under section 10A or section 10AA or section 10B or under Chapter VI-A shall
be allowed in respect of the amount of income by whic h the total income of the assessee is enhanced after
computation of income under this sub-section :
Provided further  that where the total income of an associated enterprise is computed under this sub-section
on determination of the arm's length price paid to another associated enterprise from which tax has been
deducted or was deductible under the provisions of Ch apter XVIIB, the income of the other associated
enterprise shall not be recomputed by reason of such determination of arm's length price in the case of the
first mentioned enterprise.
Reference to T ransfer Pricing Officer.

92CA. (1) Where any person, being the assessee, has entere d into an international transaction or specified
domestic transaction in any previous year, and the Assessing Officer considers it necessary or expedient soto do, he  may, with the  previous approval of the  Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, refer the
computation of the arm's length price in relation to the said international transaction or specified domestic
transaction under section 92C to the Transfer Pricing Officer.
Following provisos shall be inserted in sub-section (1) of section 92CA by the Finance Act, 2025, w.e.f.
1-4-2026:
Provided  that no reference for  computation of  the arm's length price in relation to an international
transaction or a specified domestic transaction shall be made, if the Transfer Pricing Officer has declaredthat option exercised by the assessee in sub-section (3 B) in relation to such transaction is valid for such
previous year:
Provided  further  that  if  any  reference  for  an  international  transaction  or  a  specified  domestic
transaction, in respect of a previous year, for which the option is declared valid under sub-section (3B) ismade before or after such declaration by the Transfer Pricing Officer, the provisions of this sub-section
shall have the effect as if no reference is made for such transaction.
(2) Where a reference is made under sub-section (1), th e Transfer Pricing Officer shall serve a notice on the
assessee requiring him to produce or cause to be produced  on a date to be specified therein, any evidence on
which the assessee may rely in support of the computation made by him of the arm's length price in relation
to the international transaction or specified domestic transaction referred to in sub-section (1).
(2A)  Where  
6[any  other  international  transaction  or  specified  domestic  transaction  [other  than  an
international transaction or a specified domestic transaction ]referred under sub-section (1)], comes to the
notice of the Transfer Pricing Officer during the course of the proceedings before him, the provisions of this
Chapter shall apply as 7[if such other international transaction or a specified domestic transaction is an
international transaction or a specified domestic transaction ]referred to him under sub-section (1).
(2B) Where in respect of an international transaction 8[or a specified domestic transaction ], the assessee
has not furnished the report under section 92E and such  transaction comes to the notice of the Transfer
Pricing Officer during the course of the proceeding before him, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply as
if 9[such transaction is an international transaction or a specified domestic transaction ]referred to him
under sub-section (1).
(2C) Nothing contained in sub-section (2B) shall empower the Assessing Officer either to assess or reassess
under section 147 or pass an order enhancing the assessm ent or reducing a refund already made or otherwise
increasing the liability of the assessee under section 154, for any assessment year, proceedings for whichINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
413 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
have been completed before the 1st day of July, 2012.
(3) On the date specified in the notice under sub-section (2), or as soon thereafter as may be, after hearing
such  evidence  as  the  assessee  may  produce,  including any  information  or  documents  referred  to  in
sub-section (3) of section 92D and after considering such evidence as the Transfer Pricing Officer may
require on any specified points and after taking into account all relevant materials which he has gathered,the Transfer Pricing Officer shall, by order in writing, determine the arm's length price in relation to the
international transaction or specified domestic transaction in accordance with sub-section (3) of section 92C
and send a copy of his order to the Assessing Officer and to the assessee.
(3A) Where a reference was made under sub-section (1 ) before the 1st day of June, 2007 but the order
under sub-section (3) has not been made by the Transfer Pricing Officer before the said date, or a reference
under sub-section (1) is made on or after the 1st day of June, 2007, an order under sub-section (3) may be
made at any time before sixty days prior to the date on which the period of limitation referred to in section
153, or as the  case  may be, in section 153B for making the  order of assessment  or reassessment  or
recomputation or fresh assessment, as the case may be, expires:
Provided  that in the circumstances referred to in clause ( ii) or clause ( x) of Explanation 1 to section 153, if
the period of limitation available to the Transfer Pricing Officer for making an order is less than sixty days,such remaining period shall be extended to sixty days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall be deemed
to have been extended accordingly.
Following sub-section (3B) shall be inserted after sub-section (3A) of section 92CA by the Finance Act,
2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026:
(3B) The arm's length price, being determined in relation to the international transaction or the specified
domestic transaction under  sub-section (3) for  any previous year  shall apply to similar  international
transaction  or  specified  domestic  transaction  for  the  two  consecutive  previous  years  immediatelyfollowing such previous year, on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(a) the assessee exercises an option or  options to the above effect for  the said two consecutive
previous years;
(b) such option or options are exercised in such form, manner and within such period as prescribed;
and
(c) the Transfer Pricing Officer shall, within one month from the end of the month in which such
option or options are exercised, by an order in writing, declare that such option or options are
valid subject to the conditions, as prescribed:
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to any proceedings under Chapter XIV-B.
(4) On receipt of the order under sub-section (3), the Assessing Officer shall proceed to compute the total
income of the assessee under sub-section (4) of section 92C in conformity with the arm's length price as sodetermined by the Transfer Pricing Officer.
Following sub-section (4A) shall be inserted after sub-section (4) of section 92CA by the Finance Act,
2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026:
(4A)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub-section  (4),  where  the  Transfer  Pricing  Officer  has
declared an option exercised by the assessee as va lid option under sub-section (3B), he shall examine and
determine the arm's length price in relation to such similar transaction  for two consecutive previous years
immediately following such previous year, in the order referred to in sub-section (3) and on receipt of suchorder, the Assessing Officer shall proceed to recompute the total income of the assessee for the said two
consecutive previous years as per the provisions of sub-section (21) of section 155.
(5) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent fr om the record, the Transfer Pricing Officer may amend
any order passed by him under sub-section (3), and the provisions of section 154 shall, so far as may be,
apply accordingly.
(6) Where any amendment is made by the Transfer Pricing Officer under sub-section (5), he shall send aINCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 - 2024
414 of 915 15/5/2025 9:20 A M
copy of his order to the Assessing Officer who shall thereafter proceed to amend the order of assessment i n
conformity with such order of the Transfer Pricing Officer.
(7) The Transfer Pricing Officer may, for the purpos es of determining the arm's length price under this
section, exercise all or any of the powers specified in clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub-section (1) of section 131 or
sub-section (6) of section 133 or section 133A.
(8) The Central Government may make a scheme, by not ification in the Official Gazette, for the purposes of
determination of the arm's length price under sub-section (3), so as to impart greater efficiency, transparency
and accountab ility by—
(a) eliminating the interface between the Transfer Pricing Officer and the assessee or any other person
to the extent technologically feasible;
(b) optimising utilisation of the resources through ec onomies of scale and functional specialisation;
(c) introducing a team-based determination of arm's length price with dynamic jurisdiction.
(9) The Central Government may, for the purpose of givi ng effect to the scheme made under sub-section (8),
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an y of the provisions of this Act shall not apply or shall
apply with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in the notification.
10[***]
(10) Every notification issued under sub-section (8) and sub-section (9) shall, as soon as may be after the
notification is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Following sub-sections (11) and (12) shall be inse rted after sub-section (10) of section 92CA by the
Finance Act, 2025, w.e.f. 1-4-2026:
(11) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of sub-sections (3B) and (4A), the Board may,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, issue guidelines for the purpose of removing such
difficulty:
Provided  that no such guideline shall be made after the expiration of two years from the 1st April, 2026.
(12) Every guideline issued by the Board under  sub- section (11) shall be laid before  each House  of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or  more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of  the session immediately following the
session  or  the  successive  sessions aforesaid,  both  houses agree  in  making  any  modification  in  suchguideline or both Houses agree that the guideline, should not be issued, the guideline shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of  no e ffect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under thatguideline.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "Transfer Pricing Officer" means a Joint Commissioner or
Deputy Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner authorised by the Board to perform all or any of the
functions of an Assessing Officer specified in secti ons 92C and 92D in respect of any person or class of
persons.

6. Sub. for "any other international transaction [other than an international transaction" by Act No. 15 of
2024, w.e.f. 1-4-2025.

7. Sub. for "if such other international transaction is an international transaction" by Act No. 15 of 2024,
w.e.f. 1-4-2025.